The Project Gutenberg eBook of The History of the Lady Betty Stair,
by Molly Elliot Seawell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The History of the Lady Betty Stair

Author: Molly Elliot Seawell

Illustrator: Thule de Thulstrup

Release Date: January 29, 2022 [eBook #67280]

Language: English

Produced by: D A Alexander and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF THE LADY BETTY
STAIR ***





  THE HISTORY OF THE
  LADY BETTY STAIR




[Illustration: “‘I present you with the Cross for Tried Bravery. None
has deserved it more than you.’”]




  THE HISTORY
  OF THE LADY
  BETTY STAIR


  BY
  MOLLY ELLIOT SEAWELL

  AUTHOR OF

  “THE SPRIGHTLY ROMANCE OF MARSAC,”
  “CHILDREN OF DESTINY,” “THROCKMORTON,”
  “LITTLE JARVIS,”
  ETC.

  Illustrated by
  THULE DE THULSTRUP

  NEW YORK
  CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS
  1897




  _Copyright, 1897_,
  BY CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS.

  _Dramatic and all other rights
  reserved._

  University Press:
  JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.




List of Illustrations


                                                       PAGE

  “_I present you with the Cross for Tried
  Bravery. None has deserved it more
  than you_”                                   Frontispiece

  _Now, Lady Betty had in her hand a large
  green fan_                                              6

  “_I recollect this young lady well_”                   16

  _Never was there a handsomer couple, or
  a more graceful_                                       32

  “_Let him go, you wretched bailiffs_”                  72

  “_Dear lady, this is the night I go_”                  82

  “_Tell him so, I beg of you_”                         106

  _She was just half a minute too late_                 130




The History of the Lady Betty Stair


IN the year 1798 the palace of Holyrood was inhabited by a swarm of
French people,--his Royal Highness the Comte d’Artois, who in his youth
had danced so deliciously on the tightrope as to be the admiration
of the Little Trianon, and in his old age was Charles X. of France;
his Savoyard princess, Marie Thérèse; and some gentlemen and ladies
in waiting. Among the suite were four persons whose lives had been
remotely but strangely connected in the old days at Versailles; and as
fate is an adept at such tricks, all four of them were brought together
in this old haunted palace when the Comte d’Artois took up his abode
there. One of them, the Abbé de Ronceray, was a brave, gentle old
priest, who had once been a soldier and was a soldier still at heart;
another was De Bourmont, a fellow with a fine figure, a plain face, but
irresistible among the ladies; the third was Bastien,--handsome, but
an arrant scoundrel; and the fourth was Lady Betty Stair, one of the
sweetest creatures that ever lived. Years before, in 1789, when Lady
Betty was a mere chit of fifteen, she knew both De Bourmont and Bastien
well by sight. They were officers in the Queen’s Musketeers, and Lady
Betty’s education had been finished at the palace of Versailles, under
the care of Madame Mirabel, an ancient hanger-on of the court, so they
had a plenty of chances to meet. But she was so young and unformed that
De Bourmont had never noticed the handsome slip of a girl; and Bastien
had a most unpleasant recollection of her. In those days she had a
brother, Angus Macdonald, an officer in the Scottish Guard of the King
of France, as his father had been before him. The Macdonalds were of
those who had poured out their blood and treasure with a free hand for
the Stuarts, and esteemed George III. just as much a “Hanoverian rat”
as George I. They were also of that remnant of the Highland families
which held to the old religion, and, being cut off thereby from the
profession of arms in their own country, they were apt to pass over to
France, in each generation, and see some service under the fleur-de-lis
of the Bourbons. The old laird himself had served in Berwick’s brigade,
and had married a French girl, who died young, leaving him a boy and
girl. The son, therefore, following the traditions of his family,
went to France for the restless years of his youth, and the old
laird sent his only daughter, the apple of his eye, with her brother
to be “finished” in her mother’s land. The brother and sister had
the simple ways of Scotch people, and, in spite of Madame Mirabel’s
“finishing” process, Lady Betty, who was the most highbred creature
imaginable, could never get over this pretty simplicity. She and Angus
openly kissed each other quite warmly at parting, no matter who was
present; and one morning--it was that terrible October day in 1789,
when Versailles entertained strange company, consisting of a hundred
thousand of the “canaille,” as the Versailles people called them--she
kissed Angus in sight of Bastien, who did not know they were brother
and sister. Bastien, passing along a few minutes after, ogled Lady
Betty very odiously, which she responded to by a cool stare, quite
unlike a French girl’s drooping glance; and Bastien, then and there,
made the greatest mistake of his life. He paid Lady Betty an impudent
compliment and completed his folly by a motion as if to kiss her.

Now, Lady Betty held in her hand a large green fan, and when Bastien
thought he was about to gain a kiss, she raised the fan, and, bringing
it down on his nose with all the strength in her strong young arm, gave
him such a whack that he was, in a minute, as bloody as a butcher, and
wore court-plaster for a week.

Lady Betty, having done this timely act of justice, immediately
fled, blushing with the fierceness of insulted maidenhood, while
Bastien stood still and cursed her and her green fan. Being a highly
accomplished liar, however, he invented a romance of a baker’s wife
having assaulted him while he was trying, later in the morning, to keep
her out of the Queen’s bedroom; and he really made a very comical story
out of it--only, there was not a word of truth in it.

But events so terrible followed a few days after, that for months,
and even years, Lady Betty almost forgot this adventure. Besides the
outbreak of that ferocious thirst for freedom called the Revolution,
Lady Betty met with a dreadful sorrow and loss. Within a week of the
episode of the green fan and Bastien’s nose, Angus Macdonald was found
one evening, shortly after dark, lying stark and dead in the forest of
Fontainebleau, and he had evidently lost his life in a duel.

[Illustration: “Now, Lady Betty had in her hand a large green fan.”]

The name of his adversary and the cause of the quarrel remained a
mystery; but there was a suspicion that the Abbé de Ronceray knew
something about it. It so happened that he had that very day received
ordination as a priest, after having spent more than thirty years
with the reputation of a peculiarly dashing _beau sabreur_, and
having reached the rank of commandant of battalion. He had gone to
Fontainebleau in the afternoon, at the urgent request of the old curé,
who happened to be ill and to need the services of an assistant.
About dusk the new-made priest was sitting with the curé, when a
servant came upstairs and, with a scared face, told De Ronceray that a
gentleman, evidently an officer, was downstairs in the little salon and
was in deep agitation. Would M. de Ronceray come at once?

The new-made priest went down, carrying a lighted candle in his hand,
being unfamiliar with the house. As he entered the salon a young man in
uniform arose, and, before the priest could get a look at him, blew out
the candle, leaving them in darkness.

Having been used to danger all his life, this little occurrence only
caused De Ronceray to say coolly, “Well, my friend, just as you like.
If you prefer the darkness--”

The officer’s response was to close and lock the door, to which De
Ronceray made no objection. The two remained locked in the room, and
in darkness, conversing in whispers, for half an hour, when a knock
came at the door. The officer responded by dropping through the
window on the priest’s flower-bed, and then took briskly to his heels.
De Ronceray opened the door and almost ran into the arms of young De
Bourmont. The two had known each other, as a subaltern and a commandant
might, and De Bourmont had come to pay his respects to his old chief.
De Ronceray was charmed to see him, and the two sat up half the night
conversing. De Bourmont, before then, had been somewhat irreligious,
but a change for the better was noted in him after that night, and he
and the ex-commandant became fast friends.

When the tragedy of Angus Macdonald’s death that evening became known,
De Ronceray said nothing about his mysterious visitor--whose face he
had not seen, and whose voice, except in whispers, he had not heard.
But the servant, like most of her kind, was unable to hold her tongue
and gave a brilliantly picturesque description of it, not forgetting
the incident of De Bourmont’s visit. The story, in going from mouth
to mouth, naturally had many additions and emendations, and it was
whispered abroad that De Bourmont was the slayer of the young Scotch
officer. But the days of storm and stress were at hand then, and such a
trifle as the loss of a single life made the less stir when lives went
down before the red revolution as the ripe wheat before the sickle.

The story reached the ears of the broken-hearted young sister, but
in such form that she only knew it was thought that De Ronceray knew
something concerning Angus Macdonald’s murderer. Alone, except for the
elderly infant known as Madame Mirabel, and preparing to return to
Scotland through the storm of the Revolution, Lady Betty had no means,
and indeed no wish, to know the name of her brother’s murderer. Angus
could never come back--the rest mattered little.

At last the two women--Lady Betty being entitled to be called a woman
for her spirit and sharp intelligence rather than by reason of her
years--reached the eyry in the Highlands which was the home of the
Macdonalds of Stair.

It was a melancholy life enough for the two during the next few years.
Madame Mirabel, with the singular fortitude that those shallow,
trifling people of the French court showed generally in their
misfortunes, bore her exile without a word of complaint. The climate,
the people, the fare, the bagpipes, even the heather that made the
towering peaks about them to be clothed in royal purple, she hated with
all her French soul,--but she said no word. As for Lady Betty, who was
as proud as any Highland chieftain ever was, she would rather have
died than uttered one complaint. The old laird was that not uncommon
character a hundred years ago, a Highlandman, half savage and half
courtier, who talked more Gaelic and more French than he did English,
almost found consolation for the loss of his only son in the charm and
tenderness of his only daughter. For her sake he even gave up having
those noisy drinking bouts at his house when a score of Highland
gentlemen would assemble and spend, not hours, but days, “on the lee
side of a bowl of punch.” On one of these occasions, Sandy Macgowan,
one of the inferior gentry, having been observed to sit perfectly still
for several hours, a cursory examination revealed that Sandy was dead.
This trifling accident did not interrupt the proceedings though, and
the old laird’s reply, some days after, to Madame Mirabel’s volubly
expressed horror, was brief and to the point:--

“Would ye have the pleasure of a company of gentlemen disturbed for
such a puir creature as Sandy Macgowan?”

Lady Betty, however, cast a glance of such reproach at her father that
the laird actually blushed for the first time in forty years, and
left the room. Not long afterward, though, the laird followed Sandy
Macgowan, and Lady Betty was indeed alone in the world.

In the same year, ’98, a great event happened to her, however. The
Comte d’Artois having taken refuge at Holyrood, it was thought well in
order to keep the Edinburgh people satisfied with their visitors, that
at least one of the young ladies of the old Jacobite families be asked
to attend the Princess Marie Thérèse,--and a shrewd move it was. Lady
Betty was their choice, and nothing could have been more judicious;
for, in spite of her readiness to wield her green fan on impudent young
gentlemen, and the unforgettable sorrow for her father and brother,
the sweetness, the charm she carried with her, was irresistible,--and
the French colony needed all the consolatory charm that could be had,
especially the young De Bourmont.

In the spirit of devotion among the old nobility to their exiled
royalties, a request was equivalent to a command, and the Comte
d’Artois, having requested De Bourmont’s company, that high-spirited
young gentleman, ex-officer of the Queen’s Musketeers, thereupon had
to spend several of the best years of his life in laboriously watching
and waiting upon a man who did nothing all day long and half the
night. At first De Bourmont bore it with the fine air of a martyr;
then he yearned and burned to join the Vendeans, and latterly he had
boldly made up his mind to go over to the Corsican at the first decent
opportunity. He was thinking about this one autumn night in 1798, as
he leaned against the wall in the courtyard of Holyrood, fingering his
sword and biting his lips and muttering grimly to himself, when up
rattled a huge old travelling chariot, and, the steps being let down,
a simpering old French lady descended, and after her the sweetest,
freshest, most laughing, coquettish young girl De Bourmont had ever
seen,--Lady Betty Stair. Now, De Bourmont had little difficulty in
identifying the party. He knew the Scotch girl was expected, and had
pictured to himself a tall, rawboned, redhaired girl,--in short, a
Highland chief in long petticoats. And Bastien, who was coming around
the corner of the stone gateway, recognized them and gave a little
start, and changing color turned back, but presently came forward
again. Bastien’s claim to being of the old nobility was a little shady;
consequently, he highly valued his attendance on royalty, and was
willing to stay as long as the Comte d’Artois wanted him.

Lady Betty, with the eye of an eaglet in her own mountains, recognized
both men by the light of the flaring flambeaux carried by the running
footmen,--Bastien with a thrill of hatred, fear, and disgust, and
De Bourmont with a thrill of a very different sort. She remembered
seeing him at Versailles years before, and she recalled a certain
little girlish, almost childish tenderness she had felt for him, which
suddenly came to life when she saw him again. As for Madame Mirabel,
forgetting all about etiquette, which had been the passion and study of
her lifetime, she rushed up to De Bourmont and fairly embraced him.

“Oh, my dear De Bourmont,” she cried, “such a happiness to see a French
face once more!”

De Bourmont gallantly and impudently responded to this by giving her a
sounding kiss upon her withered cheek, at which the delighted old lady
protested loudly.

“And here,” continued Madame, “here is Miladi Betty--don’t you remember
her at Versailles in that dear, sweet, happy time?--oh me, oh me!”

“Ah, yes,” answered De Bourmont, advancing and bowing to the ground
as he kissed the tips of Lady Betty’s fingers, “I recollect this young
lady well as a little demoiselle. She was so pretty, and so proud--she
reminded me of a young peacock in the King’s gardens.”

Lady Betty blushed more than ever at this--and then some one else came
forward.

“Dear, dear Bastien,” cried Madame Mirabel, who had scarcely known
Bastien in the old days, but who would have been glad to see a dog from
Versailles.

[Illustration: “‘I recollect this young lady well.’”]

Lady Betty stood for a moment throbbing and thrilling as to whether
she should speak to Bastien or not. But having, with all her grace
and spirit, her own share of hard Scotch sense, she saw in a moment
that she would be a laughing-stock forever, and would have to leave
Holyrood, if ever that green fan episode came out, she wisely
determined to ignore it for the present. Besides, did Bastien
really know her? and had he ever known her name? Bastien was perfectly
familiar with both, but he did not choose to acknowledge it, and so he
made Lady Betty a low bow, and carefully divested his countenance of
the smallest recognition.

“’Tis too late to see their Royal Highnesses to-night,” cried De
Bourmont, “so there is nothing for it but to come and sup in my
apartment--you, too, Bastien,” thinking from Madame Mirabel’s cordial
greeting that they were bosom friends of long standing.

Bastien, at this, had his moment of hesitation. Should he risk it with
that beautiful young virago or not? but he arrived by an instantaneous
course of reasoning at the very same conclusion that Lady Betty had
come to regarding himself,--he thought she did not recognize him, and
Bastien devoutly hoped she never would. And there was something else--a
more serious thing--Bastien tried to put it out of his mind but he
could not; he felt himself shudder slightly at the expectation that
the name of Lady Betty’s dead brother be spoken before him--he never
liked to hear that name. However, a little while saw them seated around
a supper-table in De Bourmont’s grim, half-furnished room in the old
palace, with a good fire and wax lights and a Scotch-French supper to
cheer them up.

The Lady Betty Stair was distinctively a child of palaces, so that
she would have been perfectly happy but for Bastien’s presence,--and
even that could not seriously affect her happiness. Besides--blessed
thought--he did not know her! Ah, Lady Betty, Lady Betty, he knows you
well enough, and he means to make you pay for that once-skinned nose of
his!

Madame Mirabel did an almost inconceivable amount of eating and
talking, and Bastien, with an eye to punishing Lady Betty’s Scotch
pride, began to complain bitterly of Edinburgh and Holyrood.

“An old rat-hole, my dear Madame. And the parties--oh, the parties!
Once a week we have levees in an old hall full of nightmares in
canvas,--portraits of Scotch kings,--and the great people from the town
are invited. Perhaps you thought the old nobility of France proud, but
you ought to see these people. Their pedigrees go back to Moses, and
their pride is as long as their pedigrees.”

Lady Betty would have dearly liked to box Bastien’s ears for this, but
De Bourmont, who was a sharp fellow, said, very artfully: “I think our
levees most charming--and every spot consecrated to the memory of Mary
Stuart, as this old castle is, must ever be interesting.”

De Bourmont knew, well enough, that a true Scotchman or a Scotchwoman
bases his or her opinion of a person upon that person’s opinion of
Mary Stuart. So Lady Betty smiled brilliantly at De Bourmont, whose
fortune was made from that onward with her, and said: “You are worthy,
Monsieur, of the hospitality of the Scotch people.”

“And who is in the suite?” asked Madame Mirabel.

Bastien named several persons, and among others the Abbé de
Ronceray,--“the best man and the worst bore! He is always after me
about my soul, when I am thinking about my body, and he preaches
alms--giving to us when most of us are so devilish poor that we are
afraid to meet our washerwomen.”

“He was my old commander,” said De Bourmont, laughing, “and the
first thing he did when he became a priest was to order me to go to
confession, and I was afraid to refuse. I had merely called to hear the
news; it was the evening of that dreadful October day at Versailles
in 1789, and I was stationed at Fontainebleau, where we heard all
sorts of wild reports,--most of them turned out to be worse than we
dreamed,--and, knowing the Abbé had come from Paris that morning, I
went to his house ostensibly to pay my respects. Before I knew it, I
was on my knees in the confessional. I was his first penitent; and I
made him a confession that kept him awake that night, _I_ know.”

Madame Mirabel cackled with laughter. Bastien rose suddenly and went to
the window, which he raised a little.

“Pardon, Madame and Mademoiselle--just a breath of air--”

He came back in a moment to his chair looking much as usual, but in
pouring out a glass of wine, his hand shook so that the wine was
spilled on the cloth.

At the mention of the Abbé de Ronceray’s name Lady Betty turned a
little pale, remembering the vague story which credited him with
knowing who was the murderer of Angus Macdonald. She said nothing,
however, only wishing in her heart that some other Abbé were at
Holyrood instead of this one, whose very name was a painful reminder of
a terrible tragedy in her life. De Bourmont, whose eyes were quick, saw
that the subject was an unfortunate one, for Lady Betty sighed instead
of smiling at his little story; so he turned it very aptly and began to
sing the praises of Edinburgh and Scotland in general. Usually, nobody
was sharper at finding out the meaning of words than Lady Betty; but,
being a Scotchwoman, she fell directly into De Bourmont’s trap, and
smiled and blushed with pleasure, to the vast delight of that young
hypocrite.

De Bourmont was so gay and full of life that he made the evening
charming. In spite of his gayety, though, Lady Betty saw, plainly
enough, a restlessness in his manner which showed that the life he was
leading did not altogether suit him. And presently, when Madame Mirabel
and Bastien were deep in recalling the terrible incidents that had
happened to those left behind in France, De Bourmont and Lady Betty
began to talk confidentially, and his dissatisfaction was plain.

“We occupy ourselves with trifles here,” he said bitterly, “because
else we should go mad. Think,--almost every Frenchman is fighting for
France, and here we are, and we can neither fight for her nor against
her. That is it which keeps me awake at night, and inspires me to all
the desperate schemes of amusement that we can find in this sober town.”

Lady Betty, who came of good fighting stock, fully understood this.

“Let me tell you, under the rose, here,” she said, “I like that
Corsican, General Bonaparte. I believe he will do greater things for
France than he has done yet.”

And De Bourmont, looking very black, whispered: “It is
maddening--maddening to be here.”

Bastien being a marplot, and seeing how fast De Bourmont was
establishing himself in Lady Betty’s good graces, was impelled by the
devil of mischief-making to say, laughing: “De Bourmont is the only
one of us who has any money, and what he has he won of me on a wager
concerning the beautiful daughter of Counsellor Mackenzie, the lawyer
in Castle Street.”

De Bourmont was not too well pleased that this escapade with the
lawyer’s daughter in Castle Street should be dragged forth before the
proud Lady Betty Stair; but being a bold fellow, and believing in the
policy of rashness, he determined to tell the story on himself.

“Castle Street, you know,” said he, “is in the new town, where the rich
lawyers and doctors and the retired tradesmen live; and it is cleaner
and brighter than the old town, with its great rookeries belonging
to the nobles. But the new town people are not invited to our levees
and balls here. Well, one day I saw the Counsellor Mackenzie’s lily
daughter in the street. Bastien was with me and we both tried to get
a glance from Flora Mackenzie, fair and stately. But in vain. Then we
very wickedly made a wager--was it not wicked, Madame Mirabel?”

“Dreadfully wicked,” said Madame, delightedly, and charmed to be once
more with such gay dogs.

“Our wager was fifty louis, whether I could or could not get into
Counsellor Mackenzie’s house and be introduced to his daughter--who is
a pretty girl enough for a lawyer’s daughter, but nothing like the old
nobility,” with which De Bourmont looked meaningly and admiringly at
Lady Betty’s highbred beauty.

“It put me to a score of trouble that cost me more than fifty louis;
but at last it came about in the easiest way in the world. I saw an
advertisement of a French master wanted for Miss Flora Mackenzie.
I presented myself. I was ushered into a gloomy morning-room. The
counsellor was there, who though but a lawyer is a gentleman if ever I
saw one, Madame and Mademoiselle. I gave my first lesson, and pocketed
fifty louis from Bastien!”

“And have given about a dozen lessons since!” cried Bastien.

De Bourmont colored warmly.

“It is good money earned,” he said angrily.

“And Miss Flora Mackenzie is the richest heiress in Edinburgh, too!”
continued Bastien, in a bantering tone.

De Bourmont turned still more crimson. An indescribable look of
haughtiness came into Lady Betty’s clear, dark gray eyes. An attorney’s
daughter in Castle Street!

Bastien, conscious that he had said enough and more than enough,
dropped the subject. De Bourmont turned again to Lady Betty, but found
her rather cold and unresponsive, and, in some way, the ending of the
little supper was not so gay as its beginning.

Next day, the ladies were presented to their Royal Highnesses. De
Bourmont had been wont to see people of great merit and high birth a
little frightened in the presence of very small royalties; but after
seeing Lady Betty’s graceful ease and modest composure in the presence
of those esteemed to be great, he laughed no more at Scottish pride.

“Faith, she acted as if she were herself only a princess of a lower
degree,” he thought, and then he remembered that among all the red
heads and hard features and rawboned figures he had seen at Edinburgh,
he had not seen one toady--so Lady Betty was not so exceptional after
all. The meeting with the Abbé de Ronceray was painful to Lady Betty.
Nine years had passed since Angus Macdonald’s death, and every year, so
far from wishing to know the name of his murderer, as she called his
adversary, she became less willing to know it. It could not bring Angus
back, and it would fill her with grief and vengeance toward some living
person or dead memory. Nevertheless, by mere dint of thinking on the
subject, she could not refrain from asking a few guarded questions of
the Abbé. She found him not only totally uncommunicative, but from the
first word he dropped she saw he did not suspect that Angus Macdonald
and Lady Betty Stair were brother and sister. So Lady Betty determined
to ask no more questions on the subject, and believe simply that Angus
had lost his life in an honorable quarrel--for she knew him too well to
suppose his death a dishonorable one. And so, without forgetting either
Angus or the stout old Highlander, her father, Lady Betty chose to
think on their lives rather than their deaths, and was tolerably happy
herself, and helped many other persons to be happy.

De Bourmont devoted himself pretty assiduously from the first to
Lady Betty, and tried hard to make her believe he had never given
another thought to the lawyer’s daughter in Castle Street. Of course
he did give her a thought--De Bourmont was not the man to give up one
lovely girl because there was another lovely girl in the case. But
after he knew Lady Betty he merely fluttered in Castle Street because
Flora Mackenzie was beautiful, and was cold, and there was a spice of
adventure in the affair.

Soon, he and Lady Betty began to talk confidentially in the long
hours they spent together, waiting in the gloomy corridors or the
dreary anterooms for their Royal Highnesses to walk, to drive, to play
cards--or to say they would do nothing at all. De Bourmont was very
restless, and Lady Betty saw plainly enough that the Comte d’Artois
would soon have to get a new gentleman-in-waiting. With this she keenly
sympathized. Her father had been “out in the forty-five” and her
grandfather in “the fifteen,” and for a man’s country to be at war and
that man not in the thick of the fight, seemed to her the most terrible
of hardships. In her heart, she felt that De Bourmont would not be
wholly a man until he cast off those false principles of honor which
kept him a gentleman-in-waiting when he should have been a captain of
the line, and in a subtle way, peculiarly her own, she communicated
this to him without giving offence.

To De Bourmont, who was used to the artificial great ladies of France,
this simple, daring, spirited Scotch girl was a revelation. She taught
him the Highland dances, and actually persuaded the head of the family
to let him wear the tartan. To carry this out, though, cost as much
diplomacy as to get a dukedom, so De Bourmont feelingly complained. But
he learned to dance these national dances beautifully, and his strong,
lithe figure never looked handsomer than when, in a kilt and bonnet,
he danced the sword dance before the royal people and their suite in
the grand drawing-room at Holyrood.

“Ah, Mademoiselle,” said the Comte d’Artois, who knew very well how to
pay compliments to Lady Betty, “the dances of your native land are not
those of courtiers, but of warriors.”

Then Lady Betty, smiling and blushing, danced flings and reels and
strathspeys, with De Bourmont for a partner,--and never was there a
handsomer couple, or a more graceful. De Bourmont not only taught his
legs to be Scotch, but even his stomach, and he ate unflinchingly of
haggis and oatcake and other Scotch delicacies when he could get them,
and never failed to tell Lady Betty how much he relished them--which
was a lie, but told with a good purpose,--that of making headway with
this charming little Highlander.

And yet, he continued on the sly to give lessons in Castle Street. He
could scarcely explain why he went there, except that he never could
resist a pretty woman; and Flora Mackenzie was as handsome in her cold,
stately way, as Lady Betty Stair with her ravishing sprightliness
and highbred ease,--for the lawyer’s daughter was much more formal
and reserved than the laird’s daughter. De Bourmont wondered often
if the Mackenzies knew who he was; but the lines of caste and class
were closely drawn in those days, and professional classes, to which
the Mackenzies belonged, knew little or nothing of the French colony
established at Holyrood, whose association was with the highest
nobility only. The weekly levees, held in the long gallery at Holyrood,
where Rose Bradwardine and Flora MacIvor had danced with Prince
Charlie, were attended by all the great families in Edinburgh, but
by none others. They were not gay levees,--there is always something
tragic in merrymakings at Holyrood,--but the Scotch people who
attended them could trace their ancestry back to the Picts and were of
the noblest blood of Scotland.

[Illustration: “Never was there a handsomer couple, or a more
graceful.”]

The dreary palace, and the dreary Royal Highnesses, and the weary,
weary suite undoubtedly became brighter after the advent of Lady Betty
Stair at the palace; and the evenings were not so long when she would
charm them with her Scotch dancing and touch their hearts with her
Scotch ballads, all done with her own sparkling grace. But can any day
be short or any night be quiet to exiles in a strange land, as these
unfortunate French people were?




II


ALL this time Bastien and Lady Betty maintained an armed neutrality,
though by degrees it grew on both that “the other one knew.” And a
strange thing happened to Bastien: he began to like Lady Betty a great
deal more than was either convenient or agreeable. At first he had
hated her, and never looked at her without remembering the blazing
wrath that showed in her eyes when she whacked his nose; and then there
was that secret uneasiness about something else which he always felt
in her company. “Faith,” he thought to himself sometimes, “perhaps it
was a good thing she had no more dangerous weapon than a fan, for,
sure, she would have used anything on me that came to her hand.” And
then he was a little fearful lest she should tell the story on him,
particularly as Bastien’s account of the whack he got from the baker’s
wife had passed into the history of the court, and was often alluded
to. The first time this happened was soon after Lady Betty’s arrival.
They were all assembled for the evening in the drawing-room, drinking
tea after the English fashion. Bastien was called upon to tell the
story, and he very promptly began the tale, meaning to stick to it if
Lady Betty should happen to let the truth out; for he had no great
opinion of a woman’s power to keep anything to herself. However, he had
but little fear, because the lie would have many years’ start of the
truth in any event.

By strange luck, Lady Betty, who was serving tea, sat next Bastien that
night. As he told the story for the hundredth time, amid shouts of
laughter,--Lady Betty, listening very gravely, apparently minding her
business of making the kettle boil over the spirit-lamp,--she could
not help blushing; but she blushed so often and so easily that nobody
noticed it. Just as Bastien wound up, though, the kettle, which had not
yet boiled, got a sudden tilt, and about a gallon of warm water was
poured over Bastien’s black silk breeches; and Lady Betty’s voice was
heard, in the tone of great meekness and softness which she always used
when she meant to be impertinent:--

“Dear me!” she cried; “how unfortunate! A thousand apologies, M.
Bastien.”

Bastien had more than a suspicion that it was not wholly an accident,
but he was much too astute to show his suspicion. He bowed and smiled,
and, professing to have an engagement with the chaplain, went off with
a very good air. De Bourmont, who remained behind, laughed in Lady
Betty’s demure face. He was not sorry to see Bastien discomfited.

This should have made Bastien hate Lady Betty the more; but so full
of contrariety is the human heart that it made him look at her more
and think of her oftener,--and Lady Betty was so charming that no man
was safe who came within the circle of her spell. Moreover, Bastien
could have dashed his brains out at his own folly when he thought of
it. Lady Betty was as poor as poverty,--for the dowry of a Scotch
laird’s daughter with a castle in the Highlands was likely to consist
of heather-bells, romantic rocks, and a large stock of family pride. If
there was anything on earth that Bastien loved more than his ease and
comfort, it was the money to buy that ease and comfort. And, as if no
element of contrariness should be lacking, Bastien felt that Lady Betty
hated him. But there is a fire that warms itself at ice, and a fancy
that loves contradictions,--and such was Bastien’s.

As for De Bourmont, Lady Betty daily grew more charming to him, and,
likewise, he continued to go to Castle Street, telling himself quite
seriously that each time would be the last. He sometimes wondered if
Mistress Flora, or her father the counsellor, suspected his real rank.
In those days, _émigrés_ were found all over England and Scotland,
earning their living by all sorts of trades. The counsellor had said to
him in Castle Street the first time they had met, “Sir, are you a man
of title?”

Now, if he had asked whether De Bourmont were a man of rank, it might
have been hard to answer; but De Bourmont could truthfully say he had
no title, in the sense the counsellor understood titles.

“For, look you, sir,” continued the counsellor, “although I respect
the French counts and marquises who work for their living, yet it has
ever been found that it is not well to introduce them into the houses
of plain citizens like me. Our wives and daughters get to be infatuated
with the fellows, and will not look thereafter at honest, plain
lawyers and doctors and merchants; and I am too proud a man to wish my
daughter to aspire to a rank she can never reach, and so I would have
her satisfied with her own class, which is good enough for any woman,
or man either.”

At last, though, Lady Betty Stair’s charms having helped to stiffen
up his resolution, De Bourmont actually determined that his next
visit should be his last. He felt some natural masculine interest in
knowing how the lawyer’s beautiful daughter would take the news, and
he had enough masculine vanity to feel very sorry for her in having to
resign his company. Flora Mackenzie was an unread riddle to him still.
There was a sort of magnetic current between them, although they never
exchanged a word except upon the subject of the French language and the
weather. At every lesson there sat, in a high-backed chair, Mistress
Mackenzie, a simple, handsome creature, who was quite happy in her
fine husband, her fine daughter, her fine house, and money in the bank.

On this day, therefore, when De Bourmont meant to make this
announcement, as he was ushered into the grim drawing-room there sat
the counsellor,--a tall, burly man, with the darkest, deepest, truest
eyes De Bourmont had ever seen. Boys sometimes have such eyes in
the white innocence of their youth; but when a man keeps it through
the storms of his manhood, he must be, as was this Scotch lawyer,
needlessly and superfluously honest.

The counsellor held a great big card of invitation in his hand,
while over him stood his wife and daughter, and even the gentle and
stately Flora was in a flutter; and as De Bourmont was ushered in the
counsellor roared out, in his big, rich voice:--

“Well, M. de Bourmont, you see my womankind all set by the ears over a
trumpery invitation to the castle.”

At this De Bourmont involuntarily straightened himself up. Although he
had managed to bear himself heretofore so that his rank and station
were only suspected, not ascertained, he could not conceal the pride of
a noble altogether.

“Sir,” he said with dignity to the counsellor, “an invitation from one
of the royal princes of France is no trumpery invitation. The Comte
d’Artois has received much civility from the gentlemen of Edinburgh,
and would return it as becomes a prince and a gentleman.”

“Good for you!” cried the counsellor, jumping up and slapping De
Bourmont on the back as a butcher slaps a bullock; while Flora’s sweet
voice echoed, “Good for you!”

De Bourmont was too much of a gentleman not to know how to take the
counsellor’s hearty commendation. He only laughed and rubbed his
shoulder.

But he had great curiosity about the invitation. They were strictly
confined to the nobility and higher gentry of the town, and how one got
to a rich lawyer in the new town puzzled him not a little. He looked
at the handwriting and he saw in an instant that it was Bastien’s.
The whole thing was revealed in a flash. Bastien wanted to bring the
Mackenzies and Lady Betty Stair together before De Bourmont’s eyes and
for his discomfiture, because never, since the night of Lady Betty’s
arrival, when Bastien had let the Castle Street cat out of the bag, had
there been good feeling between the two. De Bourmont had not only won
Bastien’s money, but had cut him out with the fair sex; and Bastien was
not the fellow to miss a chance of getting even.

De Bourmont said nothing, though, but returned the card into Flora’s
white hand, which he squeezed upon the sly. Flora changed color
slightly, but her blue eyes met his with cool composure. The womenkind
were plainly bent on going to the great ball, and the counsellor
at heart felt a secret satisfaction in the invitation, which was
the greater compliment because so absolutely unsolicited. Mistress
Mackenzie begged De Bourmont to show her how to approach royalty,--for
etiquette was strict at Holyrood and no man, woman, or child was
allowed to go out of the presence of the royal princes other than
backward. De Bourmont, in high good humor, agreed to do this. He put
the fine old counsellor in a huge chair to represent the Comte d’Artois.

“And look you, Mr. Mackenzie,” he said, “I would not place any unworthy
man to represent his Royal Highness.”

“I appreciate your handsome compliment, sir,” answered the counsellor
with dignity.

Then De Bourmont took Mistress Mackenzie in hand. She was wonderfully
quick to learn, and advanced, bowed, and retreated, with the tail of
her gown over her arm, so easily that De Bourmont taxed her with having
been to court.

“Not so much as you, perhaps,” said the counsellor, very significantly.

De Bourmont took no notice of this, which convinced the shrewd
Scotchman that the Frenchman was a man of position, because a vulgarian
would have jumped at such a suggestion with delight.

But if Mistress Mackenzie was easy to teach the graces of society,
Flora required no teaching at all, and showed herself much more apt
at French graces than the French language. Waving her white hand
disdainfully at De Bourmont, she said, “I do not need to be taught how
to approach _anybody_!”

At that she made her bow so prettily and gracefully that De Bourmont
cried, “Bravo!” and the old counsellor shouted, “Well done, my girl!”

There was no lesson in the language that day, but when De Bourmont was
leaving, Counsellor Mackenzie went with him to the door.

“M. de Bourmont,” said he, very positively, “I am under the impression
that you know more about royalties than you are willing to admit. In
short, I charge you with being a gentleman.”

For answer, De Bourmont turned his pockets, which were quite empty,
inside out.

“That does not argue that you are not a gentleman,” coolly remarked old
Mackenzie. “On the contrary, your willingness to show me your poverty
confirms me in my belief. But if you were the man I should take you
for, you would be fighting for your country in these days.”

De Bourmont grew quite pale, and stood for a moment with the shaft
rankling in his heart. Then, without another word, he went rapidly down
the street and disappeared from view.

The afternoon was fast melting into night and there was a gray pall of
mist and rain over the old town. De Bourmont walked on, not feeling
the rain or the wind. In his ears rang Mackenzie’s words. He should be
fighting for his country! He could almost see the Austrians and the
Prussians advancing upon French armies and trampling Frenchmen under
their feet--and he, he here in idleness! He ground his teeth, and
walked and walked for hours, he knew not whither. He did not appear at
dinner that night, and Lady Betty Stair was sad and distrait. About ten
o’clock, when the solemn game of ombre was going on in the grand salon,
De Bourmont came in. He looked haggard, and sat down silently in a
window seat. Presently, Lady Betty Stair came along and sat down by him.

“Where have you been, that you look so sad?” she asked.

“At Saulsbury Crag.”

“On such a night!”

“Yes. A Scotchman asked me to-day why I was not fighting for France. I
could not come back after that and play cards with his Royal Highness.”

“I know how you must have felt,” said Lady Betty, in a low voice.

“Not quite,” answered De Bourmont, with a smile that was ferocious in
its despair. “No one can know what a Frenchman suffers, all of whose
ancestors used their swords for France, while now she is fighting all
Europe, and he stays here in attendance upon royalty!”

De Bourmont spoke with such a concentration of rage that Lady Betty
looked around, fearful that he might be overheard.

“Don’t trouble yourself, Lady Betty Stair,” said he, smiling slightly.
“I wish I could be overheard! I wish this moment that his Royal
Highness would kick me out of this place. Sometimes, do you know, I
ask myself if those ‘canaille’ in France are not right after all in
thinking the country more than the king. See how gallantly they fought
the Austrians that we, _we_, WE, the royalists, invited into
France to avenge the killing of the king and queen! I assure you, I
have not spent a day in peace or slept a night through since first I
began following his Royal Highness. I thought it was my duty at first;
but there is ‘noblesse oblige’ for one’s country as well as one’s
sovereign, and I will be hanged, shot, or guillotined,” he suddenly
cried, “if I stay out of France another month!”

“Good, good!” cried Lady Betty. “There spoke a man!”

“But remember,” said De Bourmont, in a warning voice, “not one word of
this. I am here to stay until the Day of Judgment, if need be. Nothing
would induce me to desert his Royal Highness, Charles Philippe, Comte
d’Artois. I have no intention whatever of running away.” Here De
Bourmont smiled cunningly.

“I understand you perfectly,” gravely answered Lady Betty. “You want
permission offered you by his Royal Highness.”

And then De Bourmont asked, “Shall you be sorry when I am gone?”

“No,” said Lady Betty, looking him bravely in the eye, but the blood
dropped swiftly out of her fair face.

Four days after that was the grand ball. Lady Betty and De Bourmont
were much together in that time, and they were seen whispering to
one another so often and so intimately that those who could see
farther into a millstone than most people, confidently predicted that
“something would come of it.”

De Bourmont had some qualms about the coming ball, when Lady Betty and
Flora Mackenzie would be brought face to face. He was not vain enough
to think for one moment that either of them was in love with him;
but he apprehended Lady Betty’s fine scorn when she found out, as she
certainly would, that he had pursued his acquaintance with the lawyer’s
daughter in the new town.

De Bourmont had one of those generous temperaments that can be upon the
verge of falling in love with two women at once. And Flora Mackenzie
was very beautiful,--even more so than the daughter of the Macdonalds
of Stair,--and De Bourmont was in love with beauty wherever he found
it. However, he consoled himself with this reflection: “I shall soon
be out of it all. No more balls for me. I shall soon be marching and
fighting as a true Frenchman should be at this time.”

The night of the great ball arrived, and when De Bourmont and Lady
Betty went together to the anteroom of the Comte d’Artois and his
princess to attend them, De Bourmont felt very much in love with Lady
Betty’s beauty. She had no fine gowns, but she had the whitest neck
and the brightest eyes, and across her slender figure was draped the
silk tartan of the Macdonalds, which she wore as proudly as if it were
the ribbon of the Garter. If Lady Betty felt any regret at the coming
parting, of which she was the only soul in Holyrood that knew anything,
she very bravely hid it,--for De Bourmont was chagrined and half
offended at the air of careless happiness that she wore.

The company was assembled in the long ball-room, which blazed with wax
lights. At eight o’clock most of the guests had arrived, the gentlemen
wearing swords as part of their full dress, and the ladies mostly in
ringlets. A dais, covered with crimson cloth, with a canopy over it,
and two armchairs for the royal pair, was erected at the upper end of
the room. At the lower end a band was stationed which played Scotch
versions of “L’air Henri Quatre,” “Gavotte de Louis XI.,” and other
French compositions that referred to the Bourbons. Dancing did not
begin until after their Royal Highnesses had come and gone; but at
ten minutes past eight precisely the Comte d’Artois, magnificently
dressed in some old finery that he had saved from Versailles, and his
Savoyard wife, Marie Thérèse, upon his arm, made a solemn entry, and
proceeded up the long ball-room, bowing right and left to the ladies
and gentlemen who lined the way to the dais. They were not a very royal
looking pair, but very good-natured and amiable. Lady Betty Stair held
up the princess’s great train of flowered satin, while De Bourmont
walked next her, after the Comte d’Artois. De Bourmont was secretly
wondering how this ball would turn out for him; and no man can be at
ease who has two women in his mind. Lady Betty looked very demure,--she
was always very demure when she was not very saucy,--and she was not
less pretty for a concealed agitation that she had felt ever since she
knew that De Bourmont was “riding for a fall” from royal favor.

The royal party made a very slow and stately progress toward the dais,
the jewelled feathers in the princess’s head-dress nodding gravely
and incessantly, and presently they reached the dais and the princess
seated herself, her train being very carefully spread out by Lady
Betty, who then took her stand behind the royal chair. De Bourmont was
behind the Comte d’Artois’s chair, and he and Lady Betty exchanged
little nods and looks that took the place of conversation, which
etiquette forbade during the performance of the solemn and arduous duty
of standing up behind the chairs of princes and princesses.

Then all the ladies and gentlemen advanced in the order of their rank
and paid their respects. Most of them were known to the little circle
at Holyrood; but presently there was a sort of hush,--the beautiful
Flora Mackenzie, tall, superbly dressed, was approaching with her
father and mother, and scarcely ten persons in the room knew who she
was. She walked quite calmly and sedately behind the counsellor, who
had Mistress Mackenzie upon his arm. The older woman was finely gowned,
as became a rich man’s wife, and blazed with diamonds. Flora had on a
rich white brocaded satin, very unlike the simple muslins and gauzes
that were all the young girls of the exiled court could afford, and
around her neck was a great string of pearls. As she approached, Lady
Betty so far forgot etiquette as to whisper to De Bourmont:

“Who is she?”

“Miss Mackenzie,” answered De Bourmont, feeling as guilty as if he had
stolen something.

Lady Betty flashed him a look of scorn and jealousy and pain that
was indescribable. She felt quite sure that he had got them their
invitation; and Flora’s beauty and her noble figure and her string
of pearls went like a dagger to Lady Betty’s quivering heart. The
counsellor and his wife made their bows with dignity and without
any air of servility; but Flora made hers with matchless grace, and
looked as composedly at their Royal Highnesses as if she had been a
Montmorenci or a De Rohan, instead of a lawyer’s daughter from the
new town. It was a great sensation. Bastien, who was responsible for
it all, sat back in a corner and smiled like Mephistopheles. He had
paid off several old scores by getting that invitation, which had
required some diplomacy and some secrecy. He knew women well enough to
understand that Lady Betty, in her heart, at once taxed De Bourmont
with having got the Mackenzies to the levee. De Bourmont did not know
in the least how the old counsellor would take it that a man should
introduce himself into another man’s house under an assumed character,
but at the moment that Counsellor Mackenzie caught De Bourmont’s
glance, a twinkle came into the old Scotchman’s eye. He had found out
that De Bourmont was a gentleman and had charged him with it, and here
he was, one of the first gentlemen in the royal suite. De Bourmont’s
eyes twinkled, too, as he bowed and smiled at the counsellor. Mistress
Mackenzie gave him a bow of delighted recognition, but her heart jumped
into her mouth; here she had been treating a gentleman-in-waiting on
royalty exactly as if he had been a mere ordinary French teacher.
Only Flora looked at him so calmly and loftily that no one would have
dreamed that they had ever met before.

De Bourmont could not leave his post until the royalties saw fit to
retire, and that was not until nearly midnight.

Lady Betty spoke no more to him that evening. She often played at
haughtiness with him, and it was a joke of De Bourmont’s to complain
to the princess of Lady Betty’s unkindness to him, when she would be
called up and be gravely admonished; at which she would say such droll
things that the princess would laugh heartily,--and the poor princess
had only too few things to make her laugh. De Bourmont whispered to
Lady Betty, therefore:--

“If you are so cruel to me, I shall report you to the princess;” but
Lady Betty flashed him such a look of anger that he said no more to her.

A man will not stand much of that sort of thing, so, as soon as their
Royal Highnesses retired, De Bourmont left Lady Betty and, rather
ostentatiously, sought out the Mackenzies. The counsellor burst out
laughing when De Bourmont appeared.

“So, Monsieur de Bourmont,” he said, “you are a gentleman, after all!”

“But it is not my fault,” answered De Bourmont, with his usual air of
well-bred impudence. “I was born so, without anybody’s asking me if I
wished to be a gentleman or not. I had no choice at all.”

The counsellor was not very deeply offended with him for masquerading
as a tutor, although De Bourmont explained to them that the money did
not go amiss, as he was uncommonly in need of it. And all of them
laughed at De Bourmont’s plea of poverty, which, although very real, he
always put in such an amusing way that people could not but smile.

Then De Bourmont, who had not said a word to Flora, asked her to
join in the quadrille which was then being formed. She simply bowed
silently, and he led her to a place in the dance; and there, as soon as
he looked up, he saw Lady Betty Stair and Bastien standing up to dance
opposite them.

It was then too late to retreat, and, besides, De Bourmont would not
seem to run away from either Lady Betty or Bastien. The two girls
looked haughtily at each other. In Lady Betty’s eyes was a cool,
fine-lady air of scorn which was not wasted on the lawyer’s daughter.
Flora asked De Bourmont carelessly who Lady Betty was, and, in spite
of his cool and self-possessed manner, she shrewdly guessed out in an
instant something very near the truth, and returned Lady Betty’s look
of haughty contempt with interest.

The dance began. De Bourmont noticed Bastien whispering in Lady Betty’s
ear and laughing, and he saw the blood mount slowly but redly into her
clear cheek. Bastien was telling some story about him--probably more
about the wager--to Lady Betty. And he caught something about “a great
fortune,” in the turn of the dance--for Flora Mackenzie was a very
great fortune. Lady Betty carefully avoided De Bourmont’s eye, and
once, when in the dance their hands met and he gave her fingers a faint
pressure, she looked into his eyes with such an air of cold surprise
that he dared not repeat it.

At last the ball was over, and De Bourmont and Lady Betty, each angry,
chagrined, and burning with love for the other, parted, after having
plagued each other exquisitely for the whole evening.




III


“I WILL not forgive him. No, I will not. I do not like his conduct with
the lawyer’s daughter who has forty thousand pounds.” So said Lady
Betty Stair to herself many times a day; yet within a week, after a
five minutes’ talk with De Bourmont in the embrasure of a window, they
both came forth with happy, glorified faces, and De Bourmont was indeed
forgiven. He had told her that the Comte d’Artois had “voluntarily”
given him permission to return to France and he only awaited a chance
of a vessel sailing for Brittany, which was the only coast in France
where a royalist could land without being clapped into prison before he
had time to explain why he came. And then, looking searchingly at Lady
Betty, De Bourmont had said:--

“I cannot tell the woman I love, that I love her, until I have my sword
in my hand--but then--! Lady Betty, if I leave a letter for you when I
go away, will you read it?”

“Yes,” answered Lady Betty, blushing and trembling very much.

And so it came that their faces had a look of Paradise in them. This
was not the French way of proceeding, but the Scotch way; and it was De
Bourmont’s fixed opinion that the Scotch way was best.

Only a few weeks more passed before De Bourmont left for France, but
in that time many strange things happened. The first was, the news
that Bastien had been left a considerable fortune, not in assignats,
but in good English gold. Lady Betty, who could not forbear once in a
while whetting her wit on Bastien, made him a laughing-stock the very
night the great news came, while the ladies and gentlemen were awaiting
in the salon the coming of their Royal Highnesses. Everybody was
congratulating Bastien, and when it came to Lady Betty’s turn she said,
courtesying low:--

“A thousand congratulations, Monsieur Bastien, and don’t be _too_
generous with your fortune. You are not called upon to spend it _all_
in the service of the royal cause, as the Macdonalds of Stair did with
the Stuart cause.”

As Bastien was notoriously close with his money and had got more out of
exiled royalty than he ever gave it, these words caused a smile to go
around the circle,--not even Abbé de Ronceray being entirely free from
suspicion,--and Bastien longed to clap his hand over Lady Betty’s rosy
mouth.

A curious thing happened to Bastien at this time. When he had been
nearly penniless, he had thought it both wicked and absurd that he
should feel so acutely the fascination of a penniless Scotch girl like
Lady Betty, and when he had twenty thousand pounds, it seemed still
more wicked and absurd. And as money seeks money, his thoughts turned
instantly to Flora Mackenzie.

A few days after this, Counsellor Mackenzie made his way up the stairs
of the gloomy palace, and on asking for De Bourmont was shown into the
anteroom reserved for the gentlemen in waiting. There sat De Bourmont,
who was delighted to see the honest counsellor.

“My friend,” presently said old Mackenzie, fixing his clear blue eyes
on De Bourmont, “I have startling news in my family. Monsieur Bastien
has asked for the hand of my daughter Flora.”

De Bourmont was surprised; this was quick work.

“And I have come to ask your opinion of this same Bastien, who”--here
the counsellor brought his stick down on the floor with a thwack--“I
believe to be as arrant a knave as God’s sun shines on!”

De Bourmont laughed at this novel way of asking advice.

“I have nothing against Monsieur Bastien,” he replied, “and if I had, I
could not mention it, being a fellow exile with him.”

“Not to save my child?”

“My dear counsellor, I know of no man better able to take care of your
lovely daughter than you are.”

“Then you will say nothing one way or the other?”

“Not a word.”

“That settles it,” responded the counsellor, getting upon his sturdy
legs, “he shall not have my child. I beg your pardon for speaking
ill of your fellow countryman, but, to my mind, Bastien has the word
‘rogue’ writ large all over him--and is a--supercilious dog besides!
Could you have seen the air with which he asked for the honor of paying
his addresses to Miss Mackenzie--very well--very well--I’ll be ready
for this Monsieur Bastien when he comes to-morrow to get his answer.”

“My faith! I would not be in Bastien’s shoes,” said De Bourmont,
laughing; but becoming grave, he asked, “How does Miss Mackenzie stand
toward him?”

“Hanged if I know,” responded Miss Mackenzie’s candid father;
“good-morning.” And the counsellor, being a man of his word, Bastien
got his _congé_ the very next day.

The ladies and gentlemen in waiting, having little to amuse them during
the long days and longer evenings, got hold of Bastien’s unsuccessful
suit, and gave him many a sly dig as he walked about, frowning and
abstracted, and always thinking about his money. And Lady Betty, being
a rash creature, was not behindhand in this sly sort of chaff, so that
in a little while Bastien began to hate her a good deal harder than he
had ever loved her. And then, he was fully persuaded that he owed his
ill luck with Flora Mackenzie to De Bourmont, and privately resolved
to get even with him.

Meanwhile, as Bastien grew richer, De Bourmont grew poorer, and
suddenly the tradesmen he owed became very pressing in their
attentions. Being ignorant of the Scotch law of debtors, De Bourmont
listened very attentively when Lady Betty described to their Royal
Highnesses in the great salon, one evening, that peculiar institution
of Holyrood Palace concerning “abbey lairds.”

“This palace remains still a sanctuary for debtors,” she said, “and
any honest debtor, pursued by his creditors, who can reach that place
outside the gate called the Strand, is safe from arrest as long as
he remains within the demesne of Holyrood; and on Sunday he may walk
abroad anywhere he likes, without fear of molestation. My father
has told me that in his day it was a common enough thing to claim
sanctuary here, and to see a man fleeing toward Holyrood was sure to
start a rabble at his heels, all, however, apt to be partisans of the
fugitive,--for the people rather like to have the bailiffs outrun.
Sanctuary is sometimes claimed now; but, as my father said, the devil
is not so strong as he was forty years ago, and debtors are more
honest, or creditors more careful whom they trust.”

Their Royal Highnesses listened and laughed, as did the Abbé de
Ronceray, with whom Betty, for all her sauciness, was a great favorite;
but the most interested among all the hearers was Bastien. He made
so many and such minute inquiries about it that Betty asked him very
innocently:--

“Why, Monsieur Bastien, are _you_ thinking of claiming sanctuary?”

It was only a few nights after that when De Bourmont, walking down the
Cowgate in the moonlight and thinking of his proposed departure to
France and of Lady Betty, and wondering how long it would be before
he could come back and claim her, presently found two or three men
slipping out of the dark “closes” on either side, and apparently
following him. De Bourmont quickened his pace, and his mysterious
friends quickened theirs. De Bourmont broke into a run--so did his
unknown friends.

“Bailiffs, by all that’s holy!” said De Bourmont to himself; and then,
remembering Lady Betty’s story, he laid his heels to the ground for
Holyrood. A pack of idlers, standing on the street, suddenly sent up a
cry: “Bailiffs! and he’s makkin’ for the palace!”

Straightway they all started in full cry after him. Not all of them
really wanted to see him caught,--indeed, they rather impeded the
bailiffs in the chase; they merely wanted to be in at the dénouement.
Windows were flung up as the scurrying, shouting crowd followed after
De Bourmont’s flying figure. A friendly voice, evidently belonging to
some one who recognized one of the exiles of Holyrood, shouted, “Gang
it, Frenchy!”

This still further inclined the crowd toward De Bourmont, as, with
swift justice, it was felt to be a peculiarly unhandsome thing to
molest exiles and strangers within their gates. De Bourmont began
to perceive that the mob was on his side,--always an exhilarating
knowledge,--and he ran still faster toward the great gloomy pile
that rose before him in the white glow of the moon. Windows in the
palace were being raised, and two heads belonging to their two Royal
Highnesses were seen at the great windows that face the Cowgate,
watching the flight and the pursuit, which became exciting enough,
with yells, shrieks, and laughter,--for these were occasions for
public mirth. The palace courtyard was full of people, who overflowed
beyond the gate, but who were careful to leave a clear space for the
fugitive, now rapidly approaching. All the ladies in waiting had got
permission to run down the stone stairs to see the sight, which
was so excruciatingly humorous from the Edinburgh point of view,
and Lady Betty was among them. As the flying figure neared the line
of demarcation a great cry went up in English, French, and Scotch:
“Hurrah!” “Brava!” “Weel done!” Everybody, clearly, was against the
bailiffs, one of whom was almost on De Bourmont’s heels,--for Lady
Betty, recognizing him, had shrieked out, “’Tis Monsieur de Bourmont!”
The bailiff put out his arm and caught De Bourmont by the shoulder as
the two crossed the line together, and then they both tumbled over in
a heap, De Bourmont’s head and body well within the line, but his legs
outside of it.

A loud groan went up,--the crowd thought De Bourmont had lost,--and
some one came running down the palace stairs laughing stridently. It
was Bastien. The other bailiff had then fallen upon De Bourmont, and
all three were struggling fiercely on the ground. Suddenly Lady Betty
Stair advanced a step or two and cried out, in a shrill, sweet voice:--

“Let him go, you wretched bailiffs. Do you not know the law? If the
debtor’s head falls over the line, as this gentleman’s did, he is safe,
for the head is the noblest part of the body. And let him go, this
instant, I say!”

A ringing cheer broke from the crowd, and a brawny Scotchman, taking
hold of the uppermost bailiff, threw him aside like a bale of wool,
saying gruffly:

“Dinna ye hear the leddy?”

The officers of the law, more out of respect to the temper of the mob
than to Lady Betty’s words, let De Bourmont rise, who made her a low
bow, and then proceeded to carefully dust his clothes. At this the
crowd sent up a great cheer for Lady Betty, who, turning a beautiful
rosy red, said to De Bourmont:

[Illustration: “‘Let him go, you wretched bailiffs!’”]

“Monsieur, you have lost your only chance of being a laird of
Scotland,--a not inconsiderable honor. Do you not know the good old
song?” Whereupon she sang, in a thrilling, sweet voice:

    “When, bankrupt frae care,
      The fools are set free,
    Then we mak’ them all lairds
      Of the Abbey, you see.”

The crowd then, quite wild with admiration for her beauty and spirit,
shouted wildly for “Stair’s bonny lassie;” until Lady Betty, redder
than the rose, flew back into the courtyard and up the stairs to her
own room. The people then dispersed, well pleased with their evening’s
entertainment, and guying the bailiffs, who went away sheepishly
enough, followed by the multitude hooting and “heckling” them.

Next day the town rang with De Bourmont’s adventure and Lady Betty
Stair’s share in it. It was rather embarrassing for De Bourmont, but
Counsellor Mackenzie, hearing of it, came to the palace, and after
ha-ha-ing over it plentifully with De Bourmont, cried:--

“Now, let me see the bills of those rascally tradesmen, who know not
how to treat a stranger and a gentleman that has fallen upon evil days.”

De Bourmont produced his bills, which the counsellor examined. Every
now and then a great roar of anger would burst from him, and finally he
rose, shouting: “Thieves! cut-throats! highwaymen they are! You have
been most cruelly swindled, Monsieur de Bourmont, and I will make these
villains abate their overcharges; and I ask the honor of advancing you
the money to pay what you owe, and you may return it when you like.”

“Sir,” replied De Bourmont, “I have spent my lifetime with kings and
princes, but never saw I a more royal heart and soul than yours. And I
accept of your generosity as gladly as you offer it.”

The next day the counsellor returned with a batch of receipted bills.

“And I can tell you who was at the bottom of that chase along the
Cowgate. ’Twas your precious friend Bastien, who told abroad that you
were about leaving secretly for France.”

“The devil!” cried De Bourmont.

He went in hot haste to the anteroom of the gentlemen in waiting, and
there sat Bastien at a table, playing patience, while two gentlemen
of the suite lounged in a window. De Bourmont went up to Bastien and
watched him silently while he worked out his game. Then he said:

“Lend me the cards, Monsieur Bastien. I know a trick worth two of that
you are doing.”

Bastien handed him the cards, and De Bourmont, collecting them
carefully together, promptly dashed them full in Bastien’s face. “That
is for talking with my tradesmen,” he cried.

Of course, next morning, they went out at sunrise to a quiet place near
Arthur’s Seat, and lunged at each other for the best part of an hour.
De Bourmont escaped with a scratch or two, but Bastien came in for a
smart rip in his arm, and--worse luck--for a slight cut across his
unfortunate nose, after which the whole party went back to town for
breakfast.

De Bourmont had meant to keep it all from Lady Betty, but she got it
out of him before twenty-four hours. She was full of contempt, saying:--

“For you to fight Bastien! You ought to have seen him that morning,
seven years ago, at Versailles!” and then with blushes and sighs and
smiles and lamentings over her own unruly temper, she told him the
history of her assault on Bastien’s nose. De Bourmont laughed until he
cried, and then, looking at Lady Betty, saw her speaking eyes watching
him so gravely--nay, tenderly--that he suddenly stopped laughing and,
seizing her hand, cried:--

“Ah, Mademoiselle, nothing but my duty to my country could drag me away
from this or any other place, were it the dreariest on earth, so long
as you are there.”

Now, Lady Betty was rash, very rash, and, having decided in her own
mind that Bastien had long since forgotten that little encounter with
her green fan, it suited her to say to him, when she met him alone soon
afterward in the corridor:

“La! what has happened to your poor nose?”

It was only a little thing, but it was one of a long list that he had
against her, and he hated De Bourmont, and saw in an instant that Lady
Betty knew what had happened. And an evil thought came into his mind
and straightway left his lips.

“Lady Betty Stair,” he said, “I believe that you and the gentleman who
gave me this scratch think to be something more than friends; but you
never can.” Lady Betty turned pale with rage at Bastien’s impertinence,
and, for once, her nimble tongue and ready wit failed her. Bastien
followed up his advantage.

“Do you want to know why? Because your brother’s blood is on De
Bourmont’s hands. Your lover, Mademoiselle, killed your brother.”

At this Lady Betty stepped up quite close to Bastien, and looking him
full in the eye, said quietly:--

“I do not believe you, Monsieur Bastien.”

Bastien shrugged his shoulders.

“Do you not remember, Mademoiselle, the very first night you came to
this place, while we were at supper in De Bourmont’s room, he said: ‘I
was the Abbé de Ronceray’s first penitent, and I made him a confession
that kept him awake, I can tell you’?”

Yes, Lady Betty remembered it perfectly, but she would not acknowledge
it to Bastien; she merely turned to go, with a look of ineffable
contempt at him. Bastien, however, placed himself in her way so that
she could not pass, and continued speaking:--

“The Abbé de Ronceray’s first penitent was a murderer--and the
murderer, as you would call it, of Angus Macdonald. You are sharp
of wit, Lady Betty; you can find out all about this from the Abbé de
Ronceray, without his suspecting what you are trying to learn. Trust a
woman to ferret out what a man has no mind to tell her!”

“Monsieur Bastien,” said Lady Betty, in the same quiet voice in which
she had first spoken, “you have offered me several affronts during
the last few minutes, but the last is the greatest,--as if I could be
induced to follow your advice in the smallest matter in the world! I
shall lay the matter before their Royal Highnesses, and you will excuse
me for declining your acquaintance hereafter,”--and Lady Betty walked
off majestically.

This threat frightened Bastien. Being a trickster himself, he did not
understand the directness of a straightforward nature, and could not
persuade himself that Lady Betty would do so daring a thing as to
appeal to the poor royalties they both served; still, he was undeniably
nervous about it. As for Lady Betty, she was in such a storm of rage
that she scarcely knew what she felt; but after the first palpitations
of wrath, she hit upon one thing which completely reassured her. De
Bourmont knew she was Angus Macdonald’s sister, and would he, knowing
there was a bloody grave between them, offer her his love? Never!

But it is one thing to feel sure, and another thing to be certain.
She wished and longed, with an extreme yearning, that she could hear
some one deny the story. Of course she would not condescend to take
Bastien’s advice and ask the Abbé de Ronceray, and she thought it a
sharp trick of Bastien’s to suggest that she should do this, very well
knowing she would not. At all events, she would put it out of her mind
and never think of it again. Of that much she was certain.

But of course she did not. She thought of it all that day. The thought
walked by her side, and whispered in her ear, and lay down with her,
and rose with her. Nevertheless, she did not once lose her courage,
and resolving to show Bastien how little of a coward she was, that
night she dressed her lovely form in the only splendid gown she
had,--something white and shimmering,--and with her fair neck bare, and
her eyes brilliant and restless, she looked so handsome in her glass
that she was thrilled from head to foot with gratified vanity.

As she came daintily stepping down the stair, by the light of two
candles in the lobby, she found De Bourmont waiting at the foot.

“Dear lady,” he said, “this is the night I go. The ship waits at Leith
for the tide, and at midnight I take post to join her. And will you, as
you promised, read the letter I shall leave for you?”

Lady Betty, blushing and trembling, made him a low courtesy, saying in
a soft voice:--

“With pleasure.”

“And will you not kindly look out of your window on the courtyard at
twelve o’clock, when I shall be leaving? And if I see a light there,
’twill be an illumination to my soul until we meet again.”

“Until we meet again,” whispered Lady Betty. At that moment there was
the faint cry of a nightbird outside under the eaves--so faint that
only sharp ears could have heard it at all. Lady Betty, who was as
full of superstition as a whole clan of Highlanders might be, turned a
little pale.

“Hear that!” she said. “It is a bad omen, I am afraid. You know there
never was any fortunate love in this old palace; there seems to be a
blight upon it.”

At which De Bourmont, respectfully taking her hand,--for it was in a
ceremonious age,--answered, smiling, “Well, I have a presentiment--a
presentiment that I shall one day have the bliss of looking into those
dear eyes again.”

[Illustration: “‘Dear lady, this is the night I go.’”]

They were getting on quite fast in the Scotch fashion of courtship,
when a tall figure in a cassock loomed before them, and the Abbé de
Ronceray’s voice called out peremptorily:--

“Marie--Pierre--loitering here at this time of night? Oh, I beg you ten
thousand pardons, Mademoiselle, and you, too, Monsieur de Bourmont. My
eyesight is so bad--I took you at first for Marie, the maid, who is
always being followed by my footboy, Pierre--the rascal is in love with
her.”

The Abbé looked around blandly--Lady Betty was blushing, and De
Bourmont was laughing--it was too bad! Lady Betty, turning her back
on De Bourmont, walked on toward the salon and passed through the
broad folding doors and the Abbé followed her. It was early yet--not
quite nine o’clock--when the royalties usually entered the salon after
dinner. No one was there but themselves.

“I am afraid I was a little awkward just now,” began the Abbé,
good-humoredly. “I have spent so much more of my life in camps than in
courts, that I cannot altogether learn the soft ways of people about a
court. Sometimes I scold Pierre so loudly that I disturb the slumbers
of their Royal Highnesses themselves.”

Here was a chance to ask a question or two--after having solemnly sworn
she would not.

“Your first duties as a priest must have seemed strange,--confessions,
for example, Monsieur l’Abbé.”

“Very strange they seemed. I was ordained the morning of the day that
the mob entered Versailles, and before night I had heard my first
penitent confess that he had killed a man.”

Lady Betty knew well enough how the secrets of the confessional were
guarded, but in spite of herself, she burst out, leaning toward the
Abbé:

“And he killed Angus Macdonald of the Scottish Guard!”

The Abbé de Ronceray, although soldier, courtier, and priest in one,
was thoroughly disconcerted. He turned pale and then red. His lips
opened to speak, but no word came forth. A duller mind than Lady
Betty’s must have seen that she had hit the white.

“It is not worth while for you to try and deceive me,” cried Lady
Betty, with tears pouring down her pale face, “I know--I know it
all--Angus Macdonald was my brother--my only brother!”

The Abbé, much agitated, sank back in his chair. It is a very terrible
thing for a priest to reveal, even inadvertently, the secrets of the
confessional. He is pledged to die first--and many have died rather
than reveal confessions. He was a straightforward man, accustomed to a
soldierly plainness of speech. He knew not what to say, and could not
restrain a slight groan, and this was the confirmation of Lady Betty’s
fears. They had been quite alone until then, but the folding doors
opened and several persons came in. Seeing the Abbé and Lady Betty
sitting in silence at the other end of the room and plainly deeply
moved, no one approached them. Lady Betty, rising quickly, said to him,
in a broken voice:--

“You did not mean to tell; it was one of those dreadful coincidences
that no one can guard against. But for me--it breaks my heart! it
breaks my heart!” and without another word, she slipped away so quickly
and noiselessly that she might have been one of the ghosts in that
ghostly palace.

It was some hours afterward that Lady Betty, coming out of a dream as
it were, found herself sitting on the steps of Queen Mary’s Bathhouse,
at a distance from the palace. The night was raw and damp, and through
a gloomy haze she could see the faint glimmer of lights below her in
the town, and above her the great sombre pile of the palace, with here
and there a gleaming window. All was strangely still, and the only
distinct sound was the regular step of the sentry as he paced back and
forth on the pathway above her. She wondered dully to herself how she
managed to elude him,--for her present place was beyond the confines of
the palace proper,--and how long had she been sitting in that dismal
place? She remembered having on a white gown, which must have been
visible even in the dusk of night. But to her surprise, as she came
slowly out of the maze of pain and wonder, she realized that she was
wrapped in her plaid, although her head was bare and she still had on
her white satin slippers. She drew the plaid around her and cowered
where she sat in the gloom, leaning her head against one of the stone
pillars. The palace clock tolled out eleven. De Bourmont was to leave
at twelve. He would wait as long as he could in the courtyard, hoping
to see a light in her window. At that very moment he was searching
for her, to give her the letter she had promised to take. And all the
time he had known that Angus Macdonald was her brother! She could
recall a dozen times that she had spoken of him, and De Bourmont’s face
had been so tenderly sympathetic--he had seemed to feel so deeply for
this terrible tragedy of her early life; and he knew, he knew so much
more than she could tell him. As this thought struck her she uttered
a half-articulate cry of anguish, that broke off suddenly. The sentry
alone paused in his walk, listened and looked about, then, perfect
silence succeeding, resumed his steady tramp. No other sound broke the
quiet of the night.

At twelve o’clock the guard would be relieved, and a few minutes
before, a dark figure crossed the sentry’s beat. The man cried “Halt!”
and advancing at a run, seized hold of Lady Betty Stair, who turned on
him a face so white and desperate that he almost dropped his musket.
He recognized her in a moment, and anything more awkward for him never
happened. Was he to take Lady Betty Stair to the guard-house? He
began some blundering questions, holding on to her at the time, and
she, looking into his eyes quietly, and remaining quite mute, as if
she did not quite understand what he was saying, suddenly dropped the
plaid, melting, as it were, out of the man’s grasp, and ran quickly
and noiselessly toward the palace. The sentry was immensely relieved.
He picked the plaid up and determined to make a clean breast of it to
his officer. But he could not get over the uncanny look on Lady Betty’s
face.

“Poor soul!” he said to himself over and over again. “Poor soul! she
had the look and the walk of a ghost,--and of a tormented ghost, at
that.”

And at that moment De Bourmont with a sore heart, was on his way
toward Leith, to embark for France. For there had been no light in Lady
Betty’s window, and there was no letter of his in her hand.




IV


IT was more than a year after, that, one sunny August day, the Abbé de
Ronceray alighted from the diligence as it stopped before the great
stone gate of a white-walled convent in Provence. The air was soft, as
Provence air is, and the sky was of a deep, deep blue, against which
the masses of purplish woods showed darkly. The road was white and
clean, and over everything grew roses of a rich red and a richer white
and the palest pink,--all rioting in the beauty of the summer time.

The abbé had aged a little in that year, but his eyes were as kind as
ever, and his carriage as soldierlike. He walked slowly down the avenue
lined with tall Lombardy poplars, standing in ranks, like soldiers,
toward the low, rambling convent building. There was a sweet stillness
over everything,--that peculiar quiet and absence of alarms which
characterizes places from which the tumultuous world is excluded. The
abbé’s thoughts were decidedly optimistic. The country had quieted down
under the rule of the Corsican, and the abbé had no doubt, like all
the rest of the Bourbon followers, that, after Napoleon’s day, France
would again call for her rightful king, and he pleased himself mightily
with the notion. Meanwhile, it was pleasanter living in France, even
under the Corsican’s rule, than anywhere on earth,--for exile is hard
upon your true Frenchman. He had served his term of duty with the Comte
d’Artois, and had been heartily glad when he was excused from further
attendance, for a time at least, and some other patient abbé had taken
his place.

As he neared the open door in the middle of the sunny, whitewashed
convent walls, he began to be a little eager respecting the person he
was to see.

“Who would have thought Lady Betty Stair would ever be a religious! She
seemed born to be of a court--her little feet seemed made for white
satin slippers only, and dancing was more natural to her than walking.
Ah, those Highland dances she used to do so like a sprite--and De
Bourmont--”

The abbé shook his head and sighed. That chance word he let fall that
night at Holyrood lay heavy on his conscience. He had made a long
journey to confess it, and when told he had committed no sin, only an
unfortunate inadvertence, his conscience was not altogether eased. For
many years he had harbored no suspicion of the identity of the man
who came to him that October evening in 1789, and in darkness and in
whispers confessed having run Angus Macdonald through the body, when
called to account for some slight to the Scotchman’s young sister.
Of late, though, he was haunted by the thought that it was Bastien.
Lady Betty Stair evidently knew who it was, but her cry, “My heart
is broken!” seemed grotesquely out of place concerning Bastien, whom
she notoriously hated. Being well skilled in the human heart, the abbé
had seen how things were in the old days between De Bourmont and Lady
Betty Stair; but, like everybody else, he was astounded when Lady Betty
quietly left Holyrood, a few days after De Bourmont’s departure, and
the next heard of her, she had entered the novitiate of the Sisters of
Mercy. Scarcely less of a change had come over De Bourmont,--he, once
the most careless, debonair young spirit in the world,--now, a silent,
serious, determined soldier, without a hope or an aspiration beyond
his duty. It was all very puzzling, and the abbé had not cleared it up
when he pulled the convent bell and heard it clang through the building
in the quiet of the August afternoon. The abbé, bowing low to the
portress, asked to see the superior, and was shown into the convent
parlor to await her. It was so calm, so peaceful--and there were so
many roses! They even climbed through the window, and their laughing
faces peered over the stone sill. Presently the superior entered, and
she and the abbé, having known each other long before the troubles,
were delighted to meet once more; and to show her appreciation of the
honor of the visit she took him into the convent garden, where a lay
sister served seed cake and mulberry wine to him. The abbé crumbled his
cake and made a heroic effort to drink the wine; but it was too much
for his politeness and his charity combined. However, the superior,
intent on hearing of all their mutual friends, did not remark this.
After a while the abbé said:--

“I desire, after paying my respects to you, dear mother, to see Sister
Claire, who is also an old friend of mine, despite the difference
in our ages. She was in attendance upon their Royal Highnesses at
Holyrood, and she was then Lady Betty Stair.”

“Ah, Sister Claire! Well, Monsieur l’Abbé, I can only say that the more
of those fine ladies who come to us, the better. They have already
served so hard an apprenticeship to the rule of the world, that ours
seems simple enough to them. They find the hardest life of a religious
easy by comparison with what society exacted of them. They always turn
out our bravest sisters; they fear nothing.”

The abbé nodded his head with pleased approval at this.

“True, very true. It was not of the world that it was said, ‘For My
yoke is easy, and My burden is light.’”

“And Sister Claire is no exception to the rest. She is so
courageous--ready to do anything, to go anywhere--depend upon it,
Monsieur l’Abbé, there is something in blood, after all.”

The mother superior said this as if it were a highly original remark,
and the abbé smiled,--he felt sure, whatever Lady Betty Stair
professed to be, she was that with all her heart. And in a little while
the mother superior arose to send Sister Claire to him, and presently
he heard a quick, light step tripping down the flagged walk under the
lilac-trees behind him. It gave him a weird sensation; he felt as if he
were in the long gallery at Holyrood, and Lady Betty Stair was tripping
toward him in little high-heeled red slippers, and she would appear
before him in a moment in a gay little white gown, and make him a low
courtesy as in the old days; and he did not come out of his day dream
until he saw Sister Claire standing close by him, her face framed in
white, and her graceful figure not wholly concealed by the habit of the
Sisters of Mercy.

The abbé’s first idea was, that Lady Betty had grown taller and more
beautiful than he could ever have dreamed. In place of her charming
prettiness was a lofty and touching beauty. Her old spirit was not
gone,--there was the same gleam in her eyes, the same color in her
cheeks, but glorified by the dignity of self-sacrifice. She was so
glad to see the abbé that she squeezed his hand tightly in her two
small palms; and then sat down by him on the bench. Both of them were
a little shaken, and a diamond drop or two hung upon Sister Claire’s
lashes.

“How kind you were to come!” she cried; and the abbé noticed, even in
her voice, the magic change. It had always been sweet, but now it was
thrilling. And he felt sure, in one minute, that whatever might have
been the storms through which she had passed, now, at least, she was at
peace.

“Tell me about yourself, my child,” he asked.

“There is not much to tell--only, that I have to-day obtained the
desire of my heart. I have always longed to help our dear, brave
soldiers in the field, and I was so afraid I would be made to teach,
or to nurse the rich when they are ill, or something really hard. But
to-day it is settled--I am to be with an ambulance--not in charge--for
I have no experience yet--but I am to do what I have longed to
do. I think my fighting blood must make me yearn to help our poor
soldiers,--and God has been so good to me in letting me do it.”

“I congratulate you, my child. Nothing is nobler or more useful. You
will perhaps find many old acquaintances among the officers, who will
be of help to you.”

“I shall make them all help me,” she cried, nodding her head very
much as of old. Then she began to ask after the Royal Highnesses both
of them had served, and after many other persons they both knew. She
could give him news of Madame Mirabel, who was well and happy in being
still allowed to follow exiled royalty; and Monsieur Bastien, she
said, smiling, had married the widow of a rich contractor. The abbé’s
tongue was well under control, but his countenance remained expressive.
Something in his look told Sister Claire that the subject of Bastien
was unpleasing; and then she asked, quite calmly and naturally, “And
Monsieur de Bourmont, what has become of him?”

The abbé started a little, but, seeing her quite composed, though a
little pale, answered her in the most matter-of-fact way imaginable.

“A major of artillery. He frankly avowed his royalist principles to
General Bonaparte, who assured him it should not stand in the way of
his promotion, and it has not. But you would scarcely know him now, he
is so changed.”

“How, Monsieur l’Abbé?” asked Sister Claire, turning still paler, but
not losing her calmness.

“Grave, quiet, taciturn. You remember what a gay dare-devil he was
once? He looks many years older, and in a little more than a year he
has grown as gray as I am. He is, however, a useful and brilliant
officer.”

“A useful and brilliant officer!” repeated Sister Claire, dreamily.
“Then he ought to be content. None of those who live in the world can
hope to be more than that.”

Then there was a little pause. The abbé felt a slight awkwardness in
speaking of De Bourmont before her who had once been the Lady Betty
Stair. And then a new courage leaped into Sister Claire’s glowing eyes,
and she said, after a moment:--

“Monsieur l’Abbé, I wish to tell you something about Monsieur de
Bourmont, which you may at some time convey to him, and it may give
him comfort. You will understand that I ask you to regard what I tell
you as a sacred confidence. You remember, no doubt, the terrible
circumstances of the death of my only brother, Angus Macdonald, of the
Scottish Guard?”

“Quite well, my child. It was well impressed upon my memory.”

Sister Claire, for the first time, faltered a little, and when she
resumed, her voice was tremulous.

“I never associated Monsieur de Bourmont with that tragedy of
my youth until--until just before I left Holyrood Palace. But I
found out--quite by accident--one of those terrible accidents of
life--that--that--Monsieur de Bourmont killed my brother.” Sister
Claire stopped, sighed, and passed her hand over her pale face.

“But Monsieur de Bourmont did not kill your brother,” replied the abbé,
quietly.

Sister Claire shook her head, and said, in a tone of piercing sadness:--

“Ah, Monsieur l’Abbé, you have forgotten. It was from you yourself I
heard the words, ‘My first penitent was a murderer;’ and the first
time I ever saw Monsieur de Bourmont at Holyrood, he said, ‘I was the
Abbé de Ronceray’s first penitent.’”

“He was wrong. He was not my first penitent; he was my second. I was
locked up alone in the room with the murderer when Monsieur de Bourmont
arrived, and the confession was made me by that miserable man before
Monsieur de Bourmont came near me. He, too, went to confession for
the first time in many years, and I recall he said, at the time, that
he was my first penitent,--I had been his superior officer, you may
remember,--and I did not contradict him; but it was a mistake.”

There was a long pause after this, and the abbé carefully avoided
looking at Sister Claire. Presently he continued:--

“I was not present when he made the assertion which so misled you, else
I would have contradicted him then.”

A still longer pause followed, and the abbé heard Sister Claire say to
herself:--

“Bastien was the man who killed my brother.”

The old priest seemed not to hear Sister Claire’s words. He only said,
in a mildly vexed tone:--

“How well should one guard the tongue! And how unguarded was mine!
I think the Evil One must have been at my elbow when I made that
indiscreet remark. Forget it, my child!”

He still kindly looked away from Sister Claire, and began to speak of
resignation under sorrows, and those other commonplaces which wait upon
human misery. His voice sounded far away to Sister Claire. It seemed to
come from a great distance,--beyond the convent wall, with its wealth
of roses; beyond the fields and the vineyards, where the shadows lay
long in the declining sun. After a long, long while, some faint words
escaped her. She tried to speak calmly, but her words were half-sobbed
out:--

“I am glad--more glad than I can say--that Monsieur de Bourmont is not,
as I thought, guilty of my brother’s blood. But I think it is right he
should know the mistake--the cruel mistake I was under. Tell him so, I
beg of you; and tell him also that I ask his pardon for ever suspecting
him of such a thing.”

“I will see him and repeat to him every word you ask me,” replied the
abbé.

Then they both rose, and involuntarily walked down the flagged path
toward the door. Sister Claire was struggling with her agitation, but
she was conquering it. Presently she spoke again.

“When I left Holyrood--suddenly, Monsieur l’Abbé, you may remember--I
wrote a few lines of farewell to Monsieur de Bourmont. I did not tell
him why I left,--he does not know to this day.”

The old abbé knew well enough what her incoherent words meant; he
supplied the meaning without the least trouble. When, at last, he felt
it was safe to look at Sister Claire, he began to believe that, after
all, nothing could be better than what was. De Bourmont had done heroic
things, and Sister Claire would do things equally heroic.

“Remember, my child,” he said, “the believer who puts his hand to the
plough--”

“Let him not look back,” continued Sister Claire, in a thrilling voice.
“Much better--much better to go on. Say to Monsieur de Bourmont that I
hope he will be happy; and I shall not be--unhappy.”

[Illustration: “‘Tell him so, I beg of you.’”]

“No; you will not be unhappy,” replied the abbé. He was exalted enough
to see that Sister Claire had before her a great and useful life, and
such people are to be envied, not pitied. They stood together at the
convent door with clasped hands. It was a solemn parting, for each felt
it was for all time.

“Good-by, my child. You will be happy,” were the abbé’s parting
words. Sister Claire did not speak, but stood at the door watching
his tall, thin, but still soldierly figure as it disappeared down the
poplar-bordered lane. Purple shadows were falling upon the landscape,
and the scent of the roses grew almost painfully sweet. Sister Claire
lifted a pale, glorified face toward the opaline sky, where a new moon
hung low, like a silver lamp, and her lips moved in prayer. Suddenly a
bell clanged loudly four times behind her. It was her number--she was
needed. She turned to go, and met the superior face to face.

“You look pale, sister,” said the superior, kindly. “These visits from
the outside world are sometimes agitating. Have you heard bad news?”

“No, I have not, mother; I have heard very good news,” answered Sister
Claire. “A person whom I deeply loved, I thought had been guilty of a
crime; and I have this day, this hour, found that he is innocent,”--and
she went upon her task with a face like an angel’s.




V


SOME Sisters of Mercy have one vocation--some another. Sister Claire’s
was for helping the private soldiers, nursing them when they were ill,
binding up their hurts when they were wounded, comforting them when
they were dying, and even scolding them very effectively when they were
in the guard-house. This patrician was never more at home than with
Jean Baptiste, who marched away from home with a light knapsack and
a heavy heart, and who did not always know enough to keep out of the
sergeant’s black books. It was the Jean Baptistes whom Sister Claire
loved, and she was loved in turn by them. She was very gentle with them
when they were ill and suffering,--but when drinking and gambling and
other wrongdoings came to her notice, who could be more severe than
Sister Claire?

“I am ashamed of you, Jean Baptiste,” she would say sternly to a
_vieille moustache_, who had gone through a dozen campaigns scathless,
only to be floored at last at the wine-shop. “You, whom I thought one
of the best men in the battalion! What is to become of the conscripts
if the older men act like you? I have a great mind to leave the army
and go back to teaching young ladies the harp in the convent.” Sister
Claire had not the remotest idea of doing this, but the awful threat
struck fear to the heart of Jean Baptiste. The other sisters were
kind--oh, yes--kindness itself--but Sister Claire was the soldier’s
friend. The officers admired and respected her, and found Sister
Claire’s influence of substantial benefit in the matter of discipline.
But with these men of her own class she was more reserved. She was then
more Lady Betty Stair than Sister Claire of the Sisters of Mercy. By
that subtle freemasonry among classes, the officers knew they were
associating with a person born to rank and position when dealing with
her, and she used this feeling very artfully for the benefit of her
poor soldiers. This woman, who would wait on sick Jean Baptiste as if
she were his servant, would, unconsciously to herself, wear a grand air
when face to face with his officer. She would ask a favor with the calm
assumption that it must be done for her, very much as in the old days
she would desire a cavalier to pick up her fan; and she would accept
it with the graceful condescension of a great lady. She always made
her requests in person, shrewdly surmising that to say “no” was more
difficult than to write “no;” and it became a joke among the officers
how completely they stood in awe of this slight, tranquil little Sister
of Mercy. She did not cast down her eyes when she spoke to a man as
the French sisters did, but looked at them so fully and brightly that
the boldest dragoon of them felt like a schoolboy before her.

The rule of the Sisters of Mercy is a strict one; nevertheless, they
are very wise women, and if one of their order displays a great and
singular aptitude for a thing, she is allowed to follow the path so
clearly indicated to her. So it was that Sister Claire never more
taught polite accomplishments to young ladies, but worked steadily in
her chosen field.

Her first duty almost was with the army in Egypt. She had then an
ambulance of her own, and the little canvas-covered wagon was pretty
sure to be close up to the line of fire. She went through the whole
time of the French occupation of Egypt, including the terrible retreat
from Acre, without a scratch or a day’s illness; but one of the last
shots fired at the retreating French column struck her. The wound
was severe, but she never lost consciousness while the surgeons were
dressing it. All along the dreary road lay the wounded, begging to
be carried along with the army and not be suffered to perish on the
desert. And their cries and prayers so affected Sister Claire, who
implored that they might be taken into her wagon, that the surgeon in
charge gave her a dose of opium, which put her to sleep at the time and
made her very angry afterwards.

The Napoleonic wars gave her plenty to do. She followed her dear
soldiers to Germany, to Spain, and even a part of the way to
Russia--she, who had seen the sun rise on the day of Austerlitz, also
witnessed the passage of the Beresina. And by means which she never
understood, but devoutly thanked God for, she succeeded in getting
her ambulance across the river on that dreadful day, and saved the
ten wounded men of whom she had charge. It was in the days of 1814,
though, that she was of the most service. From the battle of Leipsic
until the surrender of Paris, there was scarcely a day that she was not
under fire. She was wounded three times, but all of her wounds were
slight, and she lost little time through them. She was at Waterloo,
and after working all night on the field, in the pouring rain, for the
first time in her life she fainted away, falling among a heap of dead
cuirassiers. When day broke, and the bodies were being removed, she
was found there. Groans and sobs of grief went up--when Sister Claire,
suddenly sitting up, asked:--

“Are the English in retreat?”

Alas! they were not--though soon Sister Claire was, but meanwhile doing
all she could for the wounded among the fugitives.

All this time, no hardened veteran stood fire better than Sister
Claire. She adopted that cheerful maxim,--“Every bullet has its
billet,”--and went about her business of binding up wounds and
staunching blood as calmly under the dropping fire of musketry, or the
roar of artillery, as if she were hearing a catechism class in the
convent garden.

And how was it with her heart in all those years? She scarcely knew
herself. Only that, whenever a sudden wild agony of regret seized her,
when she was tempted to rush up the greatest height she could find and
throw herself madly from it into the abyss of death, there was always
before her some suffering fellow-creature who needed her services at
that very moment; whose pain was so great it could not wait, and she
must stay and help that agonized soul and body. She counted among her
blessings that, whenever these paroxysms of despair had seized her,
there would be the ever-present sufferer; and she came to believe
silently, and with a tender and reverent superstition, that, like the
saint of old who gave his coat to a beggar, and that beggar revealed
himself presently as the Man of Sorrows, so was she tending Him in the
persons of His poor.

She had not failed to follow De Bourmont’s career, and knew every
step of promotion he gained, and thrilled with pride at it. As for
De Bourmont, from the day he threw his sword into the scale of the
Emperor, he scarcely had time to think, for fifteen years. In all
those years he had been in active service, and it was not until after
Waterloo, where he had been severely wounded, that the march of events
in his career stopped long enough for him to look backward and forward
at his life. In the long days of his convalescence in the country,
he began to examine himself and what lay before and behind him. Like
the Abbé de Ronceray, he scarcely recognized himself for what he had
been fifteen years before. He was over forty, a soldier seasoned
in battles, and too old to learn anything else. He had been cruelly
disappointed in the first and only deep love of his life, and the
memory of Lady Betty Stair was still too dear to him for any other
woman to have the mastery of his heart. He had learned from the abbé
the whole story of her sudden flight from Holyrood, and, manlike, he
could not persuade himself that she could be happy after the sacrifice
she had made. He imagined her spending a life of calm seclusion in a
convent, and did not suspect that she was almost as much of a soldier
as himself; and, like her, he came in time to feel that there was but
one life before him,--a life of duty. His career in the army had been
brilliant up to 1815, but he had been too closely identified with the
Emperor to enjoy the favor of the Bourbons, whom he had once served.
And so, after that, it was somewhat dull and obscure, until the French
dream of conquest in Africa was brought to pass, some years after
Waterloo.

In those years Sister Claire went about from one barrack hospital to
another, for soldiers need tending in peace as well as in war. The
years that made De Bourmont more sombre and taciturn, made her brighter
and calmer. So much brightness and calmness of spirit could not but
be reflected in her face, and, being beautiful in the beginning, she
seemed to grow more so as time went on. Age passed her by. The activity
of her life was such that her figure retained its airy slightness, and
she continued to walk with the graceful swiftness with which she had
moved through the dismal corridors of Holyrood Palace.

In the twenties, France had constant trouble with Algiers, and Sister
Claire was sent out to Africa, at the head of a band of sisters, to
nurse the sick. She had a fine hospital, though small, and government
aid, and never, in all her religious life, was she so comfortable in
certain ways; but never did Sister Claire become so nearly dissatisfied.

“I do not understand civilians very well, dear mother,” she wrote to
the superior. “I have been used so long to nursing Jean Baptiste,
to scolding him, and making him obey the doctor, and take care of
his shoes, and even to washing his one shirt for him, that I cannot
accustom myself to the dilettante ways of other people, who know as
well how to take care of themselves as I do.”

One fine morning in 1827, though, a great French fleet was seen off the
town of Algiers, and a cannonade began. It cannot be denied that the
first batch of wounded sailors brought into Sister Claire’s hospital
caused her to feel at least twenty years younger; and from that on,
she had her beloved soldiers, as well as sailors, to nurse, and was
correspondingly happy.

When the first advance in force, of twenty thousand men, was determined
on, the French surgeon-general, who was an old acquaintance of Sister
Claire’s, came to her and said, bluntly:

“You must come with us. You are worth the whole medical staff when it
comes to actual fighting in the field.”

“Do you think I would have stayed behind?” somewhat indignantly asked
Sister Claire.

On a June evening, the French column started for the plateau, where it
was well understood that the Algerians meant to give battle. It was a
fine sight, and as Sister Claire sat in her little white-covered cart,
watching the beautiful precision with which cavalry, infantry, and
artillery took their place in line, she felt more excited than she had
since 1815. As the second division, headed by the artillery, was about
to move, a general officer rode out from among the group of officers
around the commander-in-chief and took his place at the head of the
column. A tremendous cheer greeted him, which he acknowledged by
lifting his chapeau and bowing ceremoniously. He was a long distance
away from Sister Claire; but when the fading light fell upon his head,
which was quite gray, and his bronzed features, she suddenly caught
her breath and turned white. She did not need to ask his name; the
thirty years of their separation melted away in one instant of time;
it was De Bourmont. Several hours passed before the little ambulance
brought up the end of the rear guard. As the wagon jolted over the
rough road, sometimes brilliantly illuminated for a moment by the moon,
which sailed high in the heavens, and, again, lost in the impenetrable
darkness of wood and ravine, Sister Claire sat quite silent. Usually,
like an old soldier, she was gay at the prospect of going into battle;
but on this June night, under an African sky, she scarcely spoke to her
companion, another white-capped sister, who, like herself, placid and
silent, awaited the labors of the morrow.

Sister Claire’s retrospection was keen, but not unhappy. She knew De
Bourmont’s reputation in the army well,--intrepid, devoted to his duty,
idolized by his men; he might have been happier, he could not have been
better. For herself, she had felt from the beginning the peace which
follows the putting away of self and the devotion of one’s life to
those who suffer.

The stars seemed large, and very near to her, as she looked out of
the hooded wagon up at the blue-black sky. It was not her first
night-march, by any means. She remembered them among the snows of
Russia; she recalled the night after Waterloo, and the drenching rain,
and all the horrors of that time. Near by was the steady tramp of
thousands of feet, and afar off, the rolling sound of the field guns
on the rocky road. The columns climbed upward steadily toward the
plateau. It was only a few leagues away; Sister Claire knew they would
make it before daylight. Then she must be ready for work, getting the
ambulance in order, so it would be well for her to sleep. She lay down
in the bottom of the cart with her companion, and in five minutes was
sleeping peacefully. But she had said, with fervor, the little prayer
she made every night for De Bourmont; and she had done this for more
than thirty years.

The gray sky of dawn was changing to an all rose and opal tint when the
cart halted, and Sister Claire, with the surgeon-in-chief, surveyed
the field with an eye to establishing her ambulance. On one side
the torrent Midiffla flowed noisily, while rugged ravines and rocky
hills and dales were before the French troops. Already the ferocious
tribesmen were seen, hovering in great numbers on the horizon, while
the distant roll of wheels over the stony ground showed that the
Algerians were provided with artillery.

Sister Claire chose her position with a soldier’s eye.

“It is here, I think, Monsieur le Docteur,” she said, pointing to a
little hollow well up the side of the plateau, but protected from the
probable range of fire. “Our brave ‘enfants’ will make a stand here;
and, you see, there is a fairly good road to a spot lower down, where
the wounded may be transported after their wounds are dressed, and be
quite safe.”

The doctor shrugged his shoulders. “It will be pretty hot up here,” he
said.

“Of course,” replied Sister Claire, coolly; “but where it is hot, is
where we are needed.”

“Well, sister,” responded the doctor, laughing, “you are an old
campaigner, and have been under fire oftener than I have--and for the
honor of my profession I will not ask for a safer place.”

Scarcely had the bright lances of the June sunrise lit up the
plain than thirty thousand Algerians were seen, formed in a long,
crescent-shaped line, with the artillery in the middle, advancing.
The red-legged French soldiers awaited the order to advance--in high
spirits, laughing, singing, and indulging in that horse-play which
French discipline allows until the actual moment of going into action.
They were formed into three divisions, and Sister Claire had no trouble
in picking out, among the brilliant staff that was assembled under the
shade of an ilex grove, the figure of De Bourmont. The French paid no
attention to the great bodies of Kabyle horsemen who, dashing up close
to their lines, would fire a volley, then turn and fly. Their fire did
little damage, and when they grew bolder, and came nearer, a volley
from the French muskets scattered them. When, however, the Algerian
centre advanced upon the plateau, then the French went to work in
earnest. As the first line of the French moved forward, the infantry
on the run, the artillery on the trot, and at the first dash gained a
quarter of a mile, Sister Claire turned to the doctor, giving him back
his field-glass, which she had been using. “We shall have work soon,
monsieur,” she said, calmly.

And work they had. Outnumbered two to one, the disciplined troops of
France had to defend themselves on all sides. The clouds of dust raised
by the multitude of Arab horsemen obscured them so that they were upon
the French bayonets before they knew it. The Arabs left scarcely any
wounded. As long as an Arab breathes, he can sit in his queer, box-like
saddle, and the trained horses knew well enough when to turn and
gallop back to their own line. The French had established themselves
on a ledge of rocks, just rising above the plateau; but they could
not remain there,--they must retreat or advance. If they advanced, so
small was their force, they were in danger of being surrounded and cut
to pieces; and if they retreated--but they had no thought of retreat.
Sister Claire, in the intervals of her work, saw De Bourmont’s figure
plainly, when he dismounted and, drawing his sword, headed what the
expressive French phrase calls “les enfants perdus” as they made a dash
for the hill where the Algerian guns thundered. She did not stop for
one moment from dressing the hideous wound of a _vieille moustache_,
who had groaned and shrieked horribly until he recognized Sister
Claire; but she kept on praying while she was talking.

“Come, now,” said she, “it is very bad indeed; but you will get well.
I’ve seen worse ones than this. Did we not make the passage of the
Beresina together?”

“True, sister,” answered the poor creature, “and the pain is not so bad
after all.”

And meanwhile, on the abrupt slope of the hill, the Algerian guns were
thundering, and the masses of French infantry, each regiment led by
its colonel, were moving steadily toward the circle of guns, from which
the red death poured in sheets of flame and smoke, making the June
morning dark. And every step they advanced, they left behind them men
writhing on the stony ground.

“We must go farther on,” cried Sister Claire, suddenly; “we cannot get
those wounded men here; we must go to them. You stay here, sister,” she
said to her companion. “Come, doctor; come, Pierre and Auguste, let us
go!” and seizing a basket of lint and bandages, she started briskly up
the hill, quickly followed by the doctor and two or three bearers; and
then the men began to bring the wounded to her, and soon she and the
doctor were surrounded by a circle of bleeding creatures. Never was
she more active or more helpful, but in the fearful struggle going on
before her eyes, scarcely half a mile’s distance, she could see, at
intervals, De Bourmont’s martial figure on foot, and always heading
the line. They had reached the Algerian batteries now, and there was
hand-to-hand fighting, the Algerians being bayoneted at their guns,
while another column of red legs moved steadily up the incline to
support De Bourmont’s column.

In the midst of it all, the sharp screech of a shell was heard above
the spot where the doctor and Sister Claire worked side by side among
a crowd of wounded men, and the next moment it dropped among them. The
doctor, the bearers, and even the sufferers themselves were paralyzed,
for the fuse was still burning. Not so Sister Claire. She quickly
picked up the shell and ran with the activity of a girl of twenty down
the hillside. A cheer broke from the doctor and the bearers, and even
the poor wounded men joined faintly in the cry. Sister Claire had gone
nearly a hundred yards, when she laid the shell down carefully and
turned to run back. She was just half a minute too late. A deafening
report was heard, and she was seen to fall to the ground, bleeding from
a dozen wounds; and at the same moment a shout went up from thousands
of throats as De Bourmont, mounting his horse, dashed forward in
pursuit of the flying Algerians.

       *       *       *       *       *

The hospital of the Sisters of Mercy at Algiers was a pleasant place;
and when, many days after this, Sister Claire awoke to consciousness,
there was rejoicing, not only in the hospital, but among the soldiers,
too. Every day the gate had been besieged by men coming to inquire
after her, and when at last it was known that she would recover, the
joy of the Jean Baptistes was touching. Many officers had sent to ask
after her, but they did not cry, as the soldiers did, when told at
first that she could not get well, and laugh some days after, when told
that she could.

[Illustration: “She was just half a minute too late.”]

Many months passed on. The French were everywhere victorious, and by
October, the rainy season beginning, all of the troops were recalled to
the neighborhood of the city of Algiers.

By that time Sister Claire was quite well, and apparently her terrible
experience had done her no harm at all. She was deeply interested in
the results of the campaign, and heard with delight of the rescue of
Christian captives, and the chances that the nation of corsairs was
likely to be no more a scourge to civilization. She also knew that the
general in command had gone back to France on sick leave, and General
de Bourmont was temporarily in command. And one morning, sitting in the
garden and looking toward the glorious Bay of Algiers, she saw a smart
French frigate drop her anchor, and one of the convalescent officers
said to her:--

“That is ‘La Minerve.’ She brings out the decorations for the campaign.
General de Bourmont is sure to be made lieutenant-general.”

A day or two after that, one morning, the superior came to Sister
Claire’s room--for she was a guest of her own order then--and said,
smiling proudly:

“What think you, sister? We are especially invited to attend at the
distribution of decorations to-morrow morning. Here is a letter from
General de Bourmont; and he particularly wishes you to be present, he
says, on account of your services to the army. But the rest of us are
not forgotten either, and the general speaks in the kindest manner of
what little we have been able to do for our poor soldiers.”

The superior did not offer to show Sister Claire the letter from
General de Bourmont, and Sister Claire did not ask to see it; but, like
the superior, she glowed with natural pride at the compliment paid
their order.

All that day the sisters were in a flutter; and among themselves, when
Sister Claire was not present, they said: “How glorious! how honorable
to our order! We must give especial thanks to the Blessed Lady for
this.”

Sister Claire, however, was purposely kept in the dark; and the next
morning she was the least excited of the party of twenty sisters who
took their way, two and two, toward the great plain on the south of the
city.

Never was the scene more beautiful. The rains had begun, and in a few
days the face of the earth had become green with the most luxuriant
foliage. The ships in the little harbor were dressed in honor of the
occasion, and the French frigate, anchored in the bay, was covered with
flags. On the great plain were found ten thousand men, on three sides
of a square. The fourth side was left open, and facing it was General
de Bourmont and a splendid staff. Upon the surrounding heights were
great multitudes of people,--French, Arabs, Jews, Turks, all watching
the scene. A blare of military music smote the morning air, as all the
bands in the French-African army crashed out.

Sister Claire’s heart beat; yes, De Bourmont was to have the reward of
valor; it was just. And he had that other reward,--the esteem and love
which waits upon a commander who loves his men like his children.

Sister Claire had supposed that they would simply be given good
positions where they could see the ceremonies of the day, and was
rather surprised when the superior, with whom she was walking,
moved directly toward the opening in the hollow square; and she was
still more surprised when a young aide dashed up, and, dismounting,
respectfully led the little band of white-capped nuns to a position
very near the staff. And, strangely enough, she began to be agitated,
and to feel as if some crisis in her life were at hand. General de
Bourmont would probably come up after the ceremonies were over and
speak to them--and would he recognize her? And then the bands stopped
suddenly, and Sister Claire, looking up, heard the young officer who
had escorted them saying, with a smile: “Sister, I believe it is your
turn first to be decorated.”

Sister Claire looked at him in dumb amazement, and then looked toward
the superior.

“It is true, sister,” said the superior, who was also smiling, but
whose eyes were moist. “You are to be decorated. We knew some time ago
that you had been recommended, and your decoration arrived yesterday,
and we have arranged this as a glorious surprise to you.”

Sister Claire’s face grew a rosy red. She hesitated a moment,
but the aide, bowing low, and pointing to the waiting group of
officers, where a number of soldiers of all ages who were to be
decorated were assembled near them, she advanced with him toward the
commander-in-chief. It was some distance across the sand, glowing with
the morning sun, and the fierceness of the glare and the emotion
that she feared showed in her usually calm face, kept her eyes to the
ground. But when she reached the general and his staff, and had paused,
a voice rang out that thrilled her to the soul. It was that of General
de Bourmont, as he said:--

“Sister Claire!”

At that she raised her eyes, and her gaze met De Bourmont’s. For some
moments each forgot everything in the world except the other. They
forgot the stretch of more than thirty years since last they had looked
into each other’s eyes. They forgot the waiting thousands of troops,
the vast multitude of spectators. The white sand and fierce sun of
Algiers melted into the gloomy old palace of Holyrood. They were once
more De Bourmont and Lady Betty Stair. As they stood thus, each reading
the other’s soul through the eyes, some keen inner sympathy told them
that, however much their hearts had suffered, their souls had thriven
on that nobler life that each had led. And as they felt clearly and
more clearly every moment, that in those years of self-sacrifice, and
of that agony of separation, their newer and better selves had been
born and lived and suffered, so did the dazzling happiness of the
life they might have lived together reveal itself in all its splendid
beauty. Those moments of solemn exaltation seemed like an age to Sister
Claire and De Bourmont; but, in truth, it was only long enough to make
the gorgeous group of waiting officers wonder at De Bourmont’s strange
silence; and when he spoke, his voice was not altogether calm.

“When scarcely more than twenty-three years of age, you followed our
soldiers to Egypt and faithfully tended them. You were severely wounded
in the retreat from Acre. You followed the French army to Spain, to
Germany, and even to Russia. Your courage in saving ten wounded men
at the passage of the Beresina is remembered. You were in every battle
from the frontier to the gates of Paris, in 1814, and were three times
wounded. At Waterloo you were carried off the field for dead among the
corpses of a number of cuirassiers. For three years you have labored
in Algiers, and at the battle of Staoueli, when a shell with a burning
fuse fell near your ambulance, endangering the lives of your wounded,
you picked it up and carried it more than eighty yards before it
exploded, wounding you terribly. But your life was preserved in all
these dangers, and you have been spared to the soldiers who love you
so well. His Majesty, knowing of your devotion to our army, has placed
your name at the head of those who are to be rewarded to-day. And, by
his command, I present you with the Cross for Tried Bravery. None has
deserved it more than you.”

At the first sound of his voice both of them came back out of that
shadowy world in which their other selves had met face to face. De
Bourmont’s voice grew stronger as he continued speaking; and he fixed
his eyes upon her angelic face, shining under her nun’s bonnet. She
noticed that he was gray and very grave. She knew, then, as well as if
a thousand tongues had told her, that, from the day of their parting,
the gay, the careless, the dashing De Bourmont had ceased to exist, and
in his place was this earnest and devoted soldier, who lived for his
country and was ready to die for it. She became conscious by degrees
of the scene around her,--the African sun blazing upon the white sand,
the imposing sight of many thousands of veterans assembled to see valor
rewarded. And then, De Bourmont’s hand pinned a splendid decoration
upon her breast.

Ten thousand men presented arms to this brave woman; the officers, led
by General de Bourmont, saluted with their swords; the multitude burst
into thunders of cheers; the bands rang out a patriotic air; and Sister
Claire stood with downcast head and tears dropping upon the coarse
habit she wore. After a moment she looked up into De Bourmont’s eyes.
Each understood the other. The love of the young soldier and the Lady
Betty Stair had lasted through more than thirty years, and in that time
it had become so purified and ennobled that it was not unworthy of the
angels themselves. In De Bourmont’s face might yet be seen a haunting
disappointment; but in his heart he could not, as a lover of his
fellow-man, believe that Sister Claire’s life might have been happier.

Late that afternoon, Sister Claire, who had been busy writing in her
cell at the gray old convent, went into the garden to look for the
superior. The garden, with its olive groves and clumps of fig-trees,
was very cool and sweet after the heat of the day. The superior and
two or three of the sisters were walking up and down a shaded alley;
they were still talking about the glories of that day for one of their
order.

“I came to show you, mother, a letter I have written to General de
Bourmont,” said Sister Claire. “We knew each other in our youth, and
it was thought at one time that he was responsible for the death of my
only brother. Afterward it was proved that he was not, and I took pains
to have him informed of it. Here is the letter I have written him”:--

   GENERAL DE BOURMONT:--I desire to express to his Majesty,
   and to yourself personally, my heartfelt thanks for the very great
   honor conferred upon me. I only did my duty, as many others have
   done, and I felt rewarded in the thought that I did it for God and my
   fellow-creatures; but this other reward is not the less dear to me.
   For yourself, General de Bourmont, accept my thanks and good wishes.
   I have always remembered your goodness to me, of many years ago, and
   I shall continue to do so and to pray for you to the last hour of my
   life.
                                             SISTER CLAIRE.

“A very proper letter,” said the mother superior, who was full of pride
in the great doings of the day; “and I will send it off immediately.”

Two hours afterward, when the sisters had had their supper in the
refectory, they were assembled again in the garden. The sun was gone
down, but a beautiful rosy haze lay over the landscape, and a young
moon trembled in the violet sky. One of the lay sisters came running
into the garden with a letter.

“It is for Sister Claire; and General de Bourmont himself brought it,”
she cried.

The sisters all gathered around. It was only a fitting winding up of
the glories of the day for Sister Claire to get a letter from the
general himself, delivered in person. There was still enough of the
pale and lingering light to read by, and Sister Claire read her letter
aloud in a clear, sweet voice:

  General de Bourmont presents his respectful compliments to Sister
  Claire, and has the honor of informing her that her thanks will be
  personally conveyed by him to his Majesty. The noble career of Sister
  Claire has been watched by the whole French army, and she will become,
  more than ever, an object of respectful devotion to the soldiers of
  France, of all ranks. It was unknown to General de Bourmont, though,
  that in Sister Claire was his friend of former days. He remembers with
  gratitude Sister Claire’s kindness to him at the long distant period
  to which she refers; and he begs that she will always consider him her
  friend and devoted servant during the rest of his life.

                                             (Signed)      DE BOURMONT.

“What a fine, splendid, brave letter!” cried all the sisters,
delighted; “and to think it should turn out that Sister Claire and
General de Bourmont are old friends!”

Presently all went indoors, except Sister Claire. She remained,
walking up and down, with her beautiful eyes fixed on the stars that
shone with soft splendor. Heaven seemed very near to her.

Afar off, on the sandy plain, De Bourmont sat on his horse quite
motionless, and looked toward the white-walled convent which held
Sister Claire. His eyes were full of tears for the broken hearts of
their youth; but he said to himself, “I would not have it different
now.”




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


“Swiftnesss”, on page 118, has been changed to swiftness.

Illustrations have been moved up or down, where they interrupt the flow
of a paragraph.

“Ladies-in waiting,” on page 70, has omitted the hyphenation, to match
earlier occurrences in the book.

“Gentlemen-in-waiting,” on pages 64 and 75, have omitted hyphenation,
to match earlier occurrences in the book.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF THE LADY BETTY
STAIR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
